SURAH 2 AL-BAQARAH
The Cow
Revealed at Madinah
 In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed at Madinah following the emigration of the early Muslims from Makkah. It emphasizes that the Qur’an is the fountain-head and indisputable source of guidance to the straight path, Allah’s path of righteousness, to acknowledging His oneness, uniqueness, omnipotence, and ultimate authority. The surah impresses on the heart the fatal consequence of atheism, idolatry, and associating other deities with Allah.
    Mankind is divided into three categories: those who are faithful to Allah, those who deny Allah, and the hypocrites. This surah warns the hypocrites and announces joyful tidings to the faithful. It further warns the chronic hypocrites, idolaters, and atheists of condemnation. The surah presents the detailed narrative of the Children of Isra'il and reminds them of the days of Musa (Moses) and their extraordinary history. It also reminds them of Ibrahim (Abraham) and Isma`il (Ishmael) and their effort in building the Ka`bah and establishing a common religion. Such a narrative is also used to advise the Prophet Muhammad’s followers to think before acting. This surah also addresses piety and righteous deeds.
    
    Allah’s  laws  are  clearly  stated  in  order to guide
mankind to a pious way of life in conducting its affairs. The laws here are regarding fasting, wills, fraud, retaliation, fighting, major and minor pilgrimage, intoxicants, gambling, sexual matters, divorce and `iddah (the period after divorce during which a woman cannot marry another), suckling, spending, commercial transactions, interest, borrowing. The surah also specifies unlawful foods and mercifully relaxes enforcement under compelling circumstances. The right to forbid or permit is asserted as Allah’s own.
    The surah also calls attention to the best means of acquiring happiness here and in the Hereafter; the improper practice of advising people to do good while not following the same advice; promoting good and rejecting evil. There is no compulsion in religion, and religion is based on ease. Allah does not burden a person with what he or she cannot bear. No one is punished for the misdeed of another. It also calls attention to other virtues and commands in order to lead Muslims toward the path of liberty, equality, fraternity, justice, man’s duty to himself and to others, and his obligations to his Creator.
    The surah indicates clearly that religion is based on three primary provisions—unconditional recognition of Allah and faithful belief in Him; acknowledgement of the truth of Resurrection and Judgment; and the crowning of deeds with wisdom and piety—and that all of these must go together.
    This is the longest surah of the Qur’an, and verse 282 is the longest verse in the Qur’an. The surah’s title is taken from the story of the cow told is verses 67–73.
    
   
    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). The surah opens with letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though revealed in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. This Book, the Qur’an, in which Providence is the Guide, occasions no doubt and represents the spirit of truth that guides to all truth. It guides those who revere Allah—
    3. Those who realize the Unseen, especially Allah, Who is perceived only by the heart; those who recognize the angels who are His attendants and His messengers. And they sense with prudence the Hereafter. This Book guides those who duly worship and benevolently spend of the provisions of life We bestowed on them,
    4. Who faithfully believe in all that has been revealed to you—the Qur’an, the way of life, religious virtues, and all that has been enjoined—and they believe in all the revelations sent before you in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]) and the like, affirming the certainty of the Hereafter.
    5. The faithful have their hearts touched with divine grace. They have Providence as their guide, and it is they who will prosper.
    6. As to those who deny Allah and do not lift to Him their inward sight, it is all the same to them whether or not you warn them of menacing danger and misfortune.
    7. Allah has closed the ears of their  hearts and  denied
them the sense of hearing, and their eyes grow dim as if covered with a film. Their thinking tends to be dense, and they will suffer a fitting punishment.
    8. And there are other people who pretend to believe in Allah, give credence to His omnipotence and authority, and acknowledge the truth of the Hereafter while, in fact, they embrace their old irreverent conviction.
    9. They apply their efforts to deceiving Allah, The All-Knowing, Who knows what is hidden; and they try to deceive the believers when, in fact, they only deceive themselves, but they fail to perceive.
    10. Their ill-natured hearts reflect the disease in their inmost being, and consequently Allah increased their disease, and they became addicted to vice. There awaits them a strict punishment for their intentional assertion of what is false.
    11. And when they are told to stop corrupting on earth and not to spread discord, they say, “But we only try to bring people to abandon the wrong course of life and to adopt the right one.”
    12. Indeed, the reform they claim to adopt is nothing but a euphemism for ruin; they stand for more mischief, but they fail to perceive that.
    13. And when they are told to conform their will to Allah’s will and to believe in Him and in His omnipotence and authority as other people have conformed to His will, they say, “Shall we demean ourselves as the foolish ones did and follow the same course they followed?” Indeed, they are the fools who said in their hearts, “There is no Allah (God).” But they are ignorant and unknowing of the truth.
    14. And when they are face to face with those who believe, they declare that they have conformed their will to Allah’s will. And when they are apart with their satanic confederates who delight in wickedness, they assure them that they share in their belief and designs, but they were only laughing contemptuously at the believers for what they esteemed sacred.
    15. Allah gives them plenty of rope to allow them free scope and action in order to commit themselves to loss in a maze of error.
    16. They are the ones who have been steered by false beliefs, and instead of the guidance of Providence and the path of righteousness, they follow a perplexed path in a maze of error. In consequence, their mastery in evil trade has caused them to lose their belief.
    17. Their attitude is similar to that of someone who has kindled a fire to give light to a body of companions, and when the surroundings glowed with light, Allah extinguished their fire and put out their light and illumination and left them in want of physical light and intellectual insight.
    18. Deaf and dumb, insensible to light, they are unable to retrace their steps that led them into error.
    19. Or again, their attitude is similar to that of a people who are overshadowed with darkness and thunderclouds that send forth thunder and lightning, terrifying and startling. They think that plugging their ears with their fingers makes them impervious to sound and that they will thus avert death, but Allah besets and encompasses those who deny Him.
    20. Lightning very nearly snatches their sense of sight. As often as it flashes, they proceed under its light; and when it darkens, their eyes constrict into darkness in their heads and they stand dead. And had Allah willed, He would have deprived them of their senses of hearing and seeing, divine faculties. He is indeed The All-Powerful, able to effect all things.
    21. O mankind, worship Allah, your Lord Who brought you into being and caused you and all those who preceded you to exist. This may help you lift your inward sight to Him and be pious and reverent to Him.
    22. He is the One Who set the earth at creation as a determined habitation where you live, and He made the heaven a construction of imposing magnitude. And He sent down from heaven water, and with it He caused the various products to spring from the soil to be used as food for human sustenance. Therefore, employ your faculty of reason and do not equal with Him deities from your imagination when the knowledge of the truth is natural to you.
    23. And if you entertain uncertainty about the truth and authenticity of the Qur’an that We have been revealing gradually to Our servant, the Messenger Muhammad, then produce a surah like one of its surahs and call on all those besides Allah who can bear witness to its inimitable nature if you are declaring the truth.
    24. If you fail to fulfil such an undertaking—and undoubtedly you will ever fail—then save yourselves from the fire whose fuel will be people and stones (sculpted as false gods), the fire that has been especially prepared for the disbelievers.
    25. Meanwhile, announce blissful tidings to those who have believed and who do pious deeds, that they will be welcomed into gardens of bliss and unsurpassed beauty beneath which rivers run. As often as they are offered any kind of the fruits therein, they say, “But this is what we had before in life for our livelihood.” In effect, they are offered what bears a marked resemblance to what they had in life, but not of a like nature or kind. And there (in the gardens) they will be accompanied by purified mates, and there they will have passed to eternity.
    26. Allah is by no means ashamed to give an allegory using creatures as small as a gnat or a larger creature to convey a useful lesson. As to those who believe, they know well that what is narrated by Allah, their Creator, is the truth from their Lord. But those who disbelieve say, “What does Allah mean by such a parable?” In effect, such parables as Allah narrates are intended to lead into error the many who turn a deaf ear to the truth and to guide the many who follow the path of righteousness, and He only misguides the immoral—
    27. The immoral who do not fulfill their covenant with Allah after they have solemnly vowed to Him to do what has been enjoined, who disjoin what should be joined together, and who corrupt and make mischief in the earth. These are the ones who are the great losers.  
    28. How could you disbelieve in Allah when you were dead and He brought you into being from nothingness and caused you to exist, then He will cause you to die, and thereafter He will resurrect you, and you will return to Him for judgment?
    29. He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth, then He leveled Himself to the heaven and set it in order in seven heavens. And He is The All-Knowing Who has infinite knowledge of all things.
    30. Allah proclaimed a great event to the angels saying, “I am making a successor on the earth.” The angels said, “Will You make on the earth someone who will corrupt there, create discord, and shed blood, while we praise Your eternal name and extol Your holiness?” Allah said, “But I am The All-Knowing Who knows what you do not know.”
    31. Then He created Adam. Foreknowing that he was destined to inhabit the earth, Allah imparted to him knowledge of all the names of all classes of beings and objects, animate and inanimate. He then presented them to the angels, saying, “Give Me the names of all that I imparted to Adam if you know the truth.”
    32. The angels replied, “Sublime be Your name! But the sum of what we know is only what You have imparted to us. You are indeed The All-Knowing, The Ever-Wise.” 
    33. Then Allah said to Adam, “Tell them, Adam, the names and the destined purposes of all that was imparted to you.” And when Adam did so, Allah said to the angels, “Did I not tell you that I am The All-Knowing of all that is unknown in the heavens and in the earth and of all that you declare and of all that you conceal?”
    34. Then We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves to Adam in adoration.” The angels prostrated to Adam, except Iblis, who refused with inordinate self-esteem. He was one of the disbelievers.
    35. And We said, " O Adam, dwell you and your wife in Paradise and eat as you will and wherever you will. It is replete with choice of all delights. But avoid this particular tree; keep off it and do not draw near it lest you both be of the unjust.”
    36. But through envy and hatred, Iblis succeeded in tempting them both to what they failed to realize was an evil act: they ate of the fruit of the forbidden tree. With the prospect of pleasure and advantage of inciting them to evil, Satan precipitated their ejection from the state of supreme bliss. In consequence, We said to them, “Upon Our command to you all, go down from this blissful state with mutual enmity toward each other, and you will settle on earth for a predetermined time.”
    37. Prompted by the sense of guilt, Adam felt shame. In mercy, Allah inspired him with a prayer for invoking His forgiveness, and in turn Allah gave up resentment against him and pardoned his offense. It is He Who always accepts true repentance and the atonement made by people. He is The Ever-Merciful.
    38. We said to them, “Go all of you from this blissful state. You are doomed to a lower one, and the earth will be your home. And when you receive guidance from Me, then those who are steered by My guidance will have no fear, nor will they come to grief.
    39. “But those who choose to disbelieve and refuse to recognize Our revelations and signs will be inmates of Hell, where they will endure forever.”
    40. O Children of Isra'il, remember My divine favor and be grateful to Me for the efficacious grace that I conferred on you. And keep your covenant with Me so that I may keep My covenant with you, and regard Me with the profound reverence and awe that are due to Me.
    41. And believe in the Qur’an that I have been sending down, which corroborates and authoritatively validates the authentic Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) that you possess. You should not be the first to disbelieve in it. Do not then exchange the truth of My revelations and My Messenger for the vanity of the fleeting and ephemeral world. And be careful not to come within My wrath, nor neglect the profound reverence due to Me.
    42. Nor irreverently mix the truth that guides with the falsehood you forge, nor conceal the truth when you know it.
    43. And duly worship Me and give zakah (poor-due), and bend the knees with those who bend their knees to Me in reverence and adoration.
    44. Do you enjoin people to pay regard to what is just and right while you forget to apply your hearts to wisdom and piety, and you recite the Book, the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses])? Do you have no more sense or consideration?
    45. Resort to patience and have recourse to prayer, for more things are wrought by prayer than this world dreams of. The practice of praying to Allah is viewed by people as involving labor and effort and is hard to accomplish, but it is not so viewed by those who humble themselves to Allah in submission,
    46. Who bear in mind and affirm the certainty that they will be in the majestic presence of Allah their Lord and that they will inevitably go back to Him.
    47. O Children of Isra'il, remember My divine favor. Be grateful to Me for the efficacious grace that I conferred on you to be the chosen for My mercy and blessings out of all people.
    48. And guard yourselves against the horror of the Day when none will be allowed to pay another’s debt owed to Allah; nor will humble intercession be accepted from anyone on behalf of another; nor will the equivalent in ransom pay for the expiation of the guilt of another; nor will there be any vindicator other than Allah.
    49. And remember that We rescued you from the tyranny and oppression that you suffered at the hands of the people of Pharaoh, who brutally slaughtered your sons and spared your women. This was indeed a severe trial from your Lord.
    50. And remember the great event of the parting of the sea to make a path for you across it. And We rescued you from the vengeful people of Pharaoh, who pursued you malignantly to injure you, and We drowned them before your eyes.
    51. Then We ordained the divine assignation for Musa (Moses) and arranged where and when he would hear Us after the completion of exclusive religious devotion for forty nights. And you revered and venerated the Calf that you regarded as a god, and there you were unjust.
    52. Yet We extended to you Our mercy and forgiveness that you might thank Us.
    53. We gave Musa (Moses) the Book and the Criterion that imparts sound judgment in the choice of what is morally good, honest, and straightforward so that you may be guided to the truth.
    54. And remember that when you idolized the Calf and Musa (Moses) said to you, “My people, you have indeed been perverse in judgment by idolizing the Calf. Therefore, humbly repent to Allah your Creator and slay those among you who acted wrongly. Then you will have pursued the acceptable course to Allah your Creator.” Yet Allah gave up resentment against you and pardoned your offense. It is He Who always accepts true repentance and atonement. He is The Sublime Relenting and The Ever-Merciful.
    55. Again you said to Musa (Moses), “We will never recognize your mission until we see Allah openly.” There and then heaven thundered against you and lightning struck you dead as you gazed.
    56. Then We revived you after your death so that you might render thanks to Allah.
    57. And We overshadowed you with mists to protect you from the heat of the sun, and We ordained that the heavens provide you with manna and quails, and We said, “Eat of the worthy food that We have provided you.” Yet you were determined to defy Our authority. They did not actually wrong Us, but, in fact, it was themselves that they wronged.
    58. Remember that once We extended Our mercy to you and redeemed you from the wilderness. We said to you, “Enter this town and eat as you will, wherever you will. It is replete with a choice of all delights. But humble yourselves and prostrate to Me as you go through the gate and be thankful. Express your thoughts in words, invoking Me to unload your burden of sins. We will forgive your iniquities and give increased reward for those who do good.”
    59. But those who did wrong exchanged the virtuous spoken words for false words of their own making, and in consequence Heaven came upon them with a chastisement in requital of their wickedness.
    60. Remember when your people suffered thirst in the wilderness and Musa (Moses) prayed Us for water and We said to him, “Strike the rock with your staff.” And there gushed forth twelve springs and each tribe knew the spring that belonged to it. And then We said to them, “Eat and drink of the blessed food that Allah has provided you, and stop making mischief on earth and refrain yourselves from corruption.”
    61. Again remember when you said to Musa, “We cannot bear to always eat the same kind of food. So beseech Allah your Lord on our behalf to make the soil produce for us its verdure and its cucumber, garlic, lentils and onions.” Displeased, Musa said, “Will you people exchange the worthy and wholesome food for the food of the lower quality? If that is your wish, then leave Sinai and go down to a town and you will have what you have asked for.” There and then they were humiliated and made miserable and came within the measure of Allah’s wrath. This was because they did not believe in Allah’s revelations and because they unjustifiably killed the prophets who were of their own nation. Such vices were an outcome of disobedience.
    62. Surely, those who  believe, and  those who profess
Judaism, and the Christians, and the various sects of the Sabi’in (Sabeans), and those who follow the Prophet Muhammad, those who believe in Allah and acknowledge the truth of resurrection and judgment and who do good deeds, will have their reward from their Lord. No fear or dread will fall upon them, nor will they come to grief.
    63. Also remember when We took a covenant with you and raised the mount above you and We said, “Adhere to all that We have imparted to you—the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses])—and observe the regulations and hold them in esteem, and be mindful of Our commandments so that you may revere Allah.”
    64. Thus still you have been disobedient, and had it not been for Allah’s efficacious grace and mercy abounding in you, you would have suffered a great loss.
    65. You knew those of you who transgressed the Sabbath that We set apart for rest and worship. We decreed that they be monkeys and that they be despised and rejected of men.
    66. Such fateful attribute that We ascribed to them was intended to serve as an example to their contemporaries and to those who would follow, as well as a caution to those who revere Allah.
    67. And remember when Musa said to his people, “Allah commands you to sacrifice a cow.” They said to Musa, “Are you trying to make us the object of a practical joke?” Musa said, “Allah forbid that I be a simpleton!”
    68. They said to Musa, “Beseech Allah your Lord, on our behalf, to point out to us the kind of cow.” Musa said, “Allah says it is a cow that is neither old nor young but in an intermediate stage, and now Allah has commanded and you will have to obey.”
    69. Again they said, “Beseech Allah your Lord, on our behalf, to indicate to us its color.” Musa said, “Allah says it is a vivid yellow cow particularly attractive to beholders.”
    70. Again they said to Musa, “Beseech Allah your Lord, on our behalf, to specify the characteristic features of the cow, since to us all cows are alike, and Allah willing, we will be able to find the cow meeting the said features.”
    71. Musa said, “Allah says it is a cow that has not been used in plowing the land or watering the fields, a cow free of all physical defects.” There and then they said to Musa, “Now you have brought us the truth.” And they slaughtered the cow in sacrifice though they almost did not.
    72. And you slew a man, and the case was wrapped in mystery, and you all tried to absolve yourselves of the guilt. But Allah would not permit it, and He exposed the truth that you tried to conceal.
    73. Therefore We commanded Musa to say to you, “Strike the corpse with a piece of the cow’s carcass.” And there the man came back to life and made known the name of the man who had killed him. Thus Allah exhibits His unlimited power to effect what He wills. He displays to you His signs and His marvels, which demonstrate His omnipotence and authority so that you may comprehend the truth.
    74. Thereafter, with all the blessings and mercy that Allah has extended to you, your hearts have been as hard as stone or even harder. In fact, among massive stones are some from which rivers gush out flowing copiously; others split to allow water to flow in streams; and others shake with awe and split in awe of Allah. But Allah is not unaware of all that you do.
    75. O Muslims, do you really expect that the People of the Book would believe with you when some of them used to listen to the Word of Allah and His precepts and perverted what they apprehended to be the truth and intentionally asserted what is false?
    76. When they meet the true believers face to face, they declare that they are believers. And when they are with their like-minded companions, they are reprehended for conversing with the Muslims on Muhammad’s mission that was written in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) previously, when assenting to this truth is against their interest. They say to them, “Do you converse with the Muslims about knowledge that Allah entrusted to you so that they use it against us? Have you no common sense?”
    77. Do they not know that Allah knows what they converse secretly or whisper, and that He is well acquainted with all they utter aloud?
    78. Among them are illiterates who do not know the precepts or the mandates of the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]). And the knowledge that was imparted to them was all falsehood, and falsehood yields nothing but false hopes and conjectures.
    79. In consequence, woe to those who reproduce the Book of Allah and word it differently with their own hands, distort meanings, and say that it is from Allah in order to exchange  the  truth  for  the  vanity   of   the  fleeting   and 
ephemeral world. Woe to  them! They will be miserable for
what they have earned.
    80. They say, “Fire will not touch us but for a certain number of days.” Say to them, “Did Allah promise to secure you against vindication and in consequence you are relieved, knowing that Allah never breaks His promise? Or do you say about Allah that which you do not know?”
    81. Indeed, the inequitable have guilt in their intention, and wrongful actions beset them on all sides. Such persons are the inmates of Hell, wherein they will last forever.
    82. Whereas the faithful who do pious and righteous deeds will be welcomed into gardens of eternal bliss and unsurpassed beauty.
    83. Again, We entered into a covenant with the Children of Isra'il, thus: “You shall worship no one but Allah and adore Him with appropriate rites; and you shall commit your parents to your kind care; and you shall express a friendly and kind disposition to your kindred, to the orphans, and to the poor; and you shall talk to people with forbearance; and you shall engage in prayer and give zakah (poor due).” Yet you turned away and paid no attention, except for a few who opened their hearts’ ears and heeded Our order.
    84. Again, We entered into another covenant, thus: “Do not shed your own blood, nor expel each other from your dwellings.” And you sanctioned it and bore witness to its validity.
    85. Yet again you kill each other and expel some of your own people from their homes, and you ally yourselves with their enemies in sin and transgression against the divine Law. When some of them fall into captivity you revert to the principles in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and redeem them, albeit the same principles forbid you to shed your own blood or to expel each other from your homes. Do you people believe in part of the Book and discredit part upon the ground of your authority? Indeed, he who adopts this line of conduct will suffer for his offense. He will be disgraced here, and in the Hereafter will such persons suffer the severest torment and torture. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.
    86. These people and such-like persons have exchanged the Hereafter for here below, with eyes fixed upon the world and its vanities. Their suffering will never abate, nor will their excruciating pain be mitigated, nor can anyone help them out of their misery.
    87. You Children of Isra'il know that We gave Musa (Moses) the Book (the Tawrah) and We sent other messengers sequentially. We sent `Isa (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary) with clear and plain revelations and signs guiding out of darkness into illumination and enlightenment. And We supported him by the Holy Spirit (Angel Jibril; Gabriel). Yet, is it not, indeed, incredible that as often as a messenger is sent to you with divine principles that are not to your taste, you become proud and display arrogance? You renounce some of the messengers, you accuse some of lies, and you kill others.
    88. They say to you, “Our hearts are deaf.” The fact is that Allah has cursed them for their irreverence and impiety, so little do they believe!
    89. When a Book was presented to them from Allah, a Book that corroborates the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) that they possess, they refused to accept it, although the Tawrah clearly foretold the coming of the Prophet Muhammad—an event that they had always expected and at times had wished hastened to help them get the upper hand in argument and gain victory in war over those who deny Allah. Yet when the prophesy was fulfilled and the Prophet Muhammad came with the Qur’an, they refused to acknowledge the truth of his mission. Consequently, Allah has cursed the disbelievers.
    90. How worthless is the price they received for selling themselves to immorality and wickedness, inequitably rejecting the truth received from Allah! Theirs is a defiant impiety induced by transgression and envy, which reflects hatred of those whom Allah has mercifully chosen as He wills to be the recipients of His revelation. They came again within the measure of Allah’s wrath and incurred wrath upon wrath. And the punishment is humiliating to those who deny Allah and ignore His commands.
    91. And when they are told to acknowledge the commands that Allah has imparted to the Prophet Muhammad—whom they know to be the last of Allah’s messengers carrying what was entrusted to him by Allah—they say, “We only acknowledge what has been imparted to us.” And they deny and renounce all else when they know fully well that it is the truth that corroborates the Tawrah. Say to them, “Why then did you slay the prophets of Allah in the past if you are true believers?”
    92. Indeed, Musa (Moses) came to you in earlier times with the clear and plain revelations and signs that guide out of darkness and superstition into enlightenment. Yet in his absence to fulfill the divine assignation, you revered and venerated the Calf and committed yourselves to an evil line of injustice.
    93. And remember when We entered into a covenant with you and We stabilized Mount Tur above you when it shook with awe of Allah. And We said, “Adhere to all that We have imparted to you—the Tawrah—and esteem and observe the code of discipline and regulations, hold to your promise, pay attention, and regard it.” And your people said, “We have opened the ears of our hearts.” But their actions did not accord with their words. They delightedly drank in their wicked feelings towards the Calf. Say to them, “If these are the principles of your faith that steer your course of action, then miserable is what your faith commands you, if you are believers!”
    94. Say to them, “If you truly believe that eternal bliss is asserted as your own to the exclusion of all other people, then wish yourselves dead if you are declaring the truth.”
    95. But they will never wish their death because of their awareness of what their hands have committed. And Allah knows well the unjust.
    96. You will find them of all people the most eager for longevity, even more so than the polytheists. None of them aims for the grave but he would rather be entangled in the web of life for a thousand years. But nothing will alter his torment, even if he lives to an advanced age. And Allah sees all that they do.
    97. Say to them that he who sets himself against and defies Jibril (Angel Gabriel)—it is Jibril who imparts the Qur’an to your consciousness with Allah’s authority, the Qur’an that corroborates the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and carries guidance and good tidings to the believers— 
    98. He who is an enemy to Allah and His angels, to His messengers, and to Jibril and Mikal (Angel Michael), must realize that Allah is at enmity with the disbelievers.
    99. We have sent down to you clear Qur’anic revelations as guidance, and none refuse to acknowledge them but the faithless perverse who are morally depraved.
    100. Is it not the case that as often as they make a solemn covenant to you, Muhammad, and to others before you, some of them always break it?  In fact, most of them are disbelievers.
    101. And when the prophesy in their Book—the authentic Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses])—was fulfilled and the Messenger Muhammad came carrying the final message from Allah, and with him came the Qur’an, which corroborates and validates the Tawrah, some of them ignored their own Book and turned their backs upon it as if they were never aware of it.
    102. And they pursued vanity and neglected religion. They followed the allegation related by devils who attributed Sulayman’s (Solomon’s) prophethood and power to the art of sorcery and occult practices. But Sulayman was not a disbeliever. In fact, it was those with satanic characteristics among them who disbelieved. They taught people necromancy, which they practiced through contact with evil spirits and through the knowledge they acquired from revelations imparted to the two angels Harut and Marut. But Harut and Marut made it clear to the people whom they taught that their art was a source of temptation and an incitement to evil, and they cautioned against the practice of this art, as it meant defiance of Allah. Yet those with satanic characteristics pursued this evil art to sow discord between husband and wife and similar evil acts. Nonetheless, no one suffers harm unless it has been divinely predetermined. They applied themselves to learning the art, which inflicts harm on them, and they derive no profit from it. Yet they knew that he who engages in sorcery for vice will have no share in the bliss of the Hereafter. How worthless was the price they received for selling themselves to immorality and wickedness, if they only knew!
    103. Had they truthfully believed in Allah and revered Him, Allah would have been their hope, and His mercy and blessings would have been better than what they lost, if only they knew.
    104. O you who believe, do not address the Messenger in Hebrew disrespectfully. Do not say, “Ra`ina,” (a word of ambiguous meaning that can be disrespectful) when you desire his attention. Instead say, “Unthurna,” (meaning “Turn your attention to us.”) And those who defy Allah will be put to torture.   
    105. Neither the disbelievers among the People of the Book nor the polytheists wish that you receive Allah’s mercy and blessings, but Allah extends His mercy to whom He wills. He is the source of sufficient grace abounding in whom He wills and of the magnificent grace.
    106. They question the wisdom of abrogation in certain circumstances.  None of Our signs do We abrogate or consign to oblivion, but We replace it with a better or equivalent substitute. Do you not know that Allah is All-Powerful to effect all things?
    107. Do you not know that Allah has the sovereign authority and the kingdom of the heavens and earth? And you people have no patron besides Him, nor can anyone help you.
    108. Or do you people wish to challenge your Messenger to produce miracles as Musa (Moses) was challenged earlier by his contemporaries, who demanded to see Allah? Indeed, he who exchanges belief for disbelief will have wandered from the straight path.
    109. Many of the People of the Book wish they could turn you into disbelievers—a desire induced by base envy—even though they have recognized the truth. Nevertheless, forgive them and do not entertain ill thoughts about them until Allah comes with His command. Allah is indeed All-Powerful over everything.
    110. And keep up prayer and give zakah (poor due). And whatever piety you forward toward future security, you will find it preserved with Allah. Allah sees all that you do.
    111. And they say, “No one will be admitted to Paradise and enjoy the bliss and unsurpassed beauty of the Hereafter but he who conforms to Judaism or Christianity.” This is their coveting. Say to them, “Produce your evidence if you are sincere!”
    112. But it is only he who surrenders to Allah and does pious deeds who will find his reward preserved for him with his Lord, and no fear or dread will fall upon him nor will he come to grief.
    113. And yet the Jews say, “The Christians lean on a religion that does not stand upon truth.” And the Christians say, “The Jews lean on a religion that does not stand upon truth,” while they recite the (same) Book. This much said those who have no knowledge of the Book, but Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment in matters about which they were at variance.            
    114. And who is more unjust than he who blocks the way to the mosques of Allah and purposes to ruin them and prevent the adoration of the eternal name of Allah? Such persons are not to enter these places except humbly in fear. They will suffer disgrace and multiple humiliations here, and in the Hereafter, they will be put to tremendous torment.
    115. And to Allah belong the east and the west, and therefore to whichever point in the universe you turn, you will be in the august face of Allah. Allah is Infinite, All-Knowing.
    116. And yet they say, “Allah has begotten a son.” Glory be to Him and extolled be His glorious attributes! But to Him belongs all that exists in the heavens and earth, and all are submissively reverent to Him.
    117. He it is Who originated the heavens and earth, and when He ordains something He only says, “Be,” and it is.
    118. And those who do not know said, “If only Allah would speak to us or display a sign proving both Muhammad’s prophethood and integrity!”  This was said by those who preceded them, and both have hearts of like nature. We have expounded Our revelations and Our signs, which prove both omnipotence and authority to people who have certitude.
    119. Surely We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good tidings and as a warner to all, and you will not be responsible for those who are fuel for Hell.
    120. In fact, neither the Jews nor the Christians will accept you until you conform to their system of faith. Say to them, “Indeed, it is only the guidance of Allah that leads to the path of righteousness.” And should you be tempted to follow their wishes after all the knowledge that has come to you, then do not expect Allah to maintain you under His guardianship or patronage.
    121. Those of the people to whom We gave the Tawrah and the Injil (the Books revealed to Musa [Moses] and `Isa [Jesus], respectively) who read their Book with careful scrutiny will believe what really proceeded from Allah. Such persons will comprehend the truth (and accordingly honor the Qur’an). And he who refuses to acknowledge the truth that has proceeded from Allah will be the great loser.
    122. O Children of Isra'il, acknowledge My divine favor and be grateful to Me for the efficacious grace to you as to be chosen out of all people (in your time period in the past) for My mercy and blessings. 
    123. Guard yourselves from the horror of the Day when none will be allowed to pay another’s debt to Allah; and the equivalent in ransom will not pay for the expiation of the guilt of another; and the intercession will not be accepted from anyone on behalf of another; and no protector other than Allah be of any help in the inevitable trouble.
    124. Remember when Allah tested Ibrahim (Abraham) with divine commands, which Ibrahim fulfilled. In return, Allah said to him, “I have ordained to appoint you as the imam or religious leader of mankind.” “Will this apply to my descendants?” asked Ibrahim. “My covenant,” said Allah, “is not designated to the unjust.”
    125. And We ordained the Sacred House, the Ka`bah, as a safe retreat for mankind, and that you Muslims take Ibrahim’s station where he performed the prescribed acts of devotion as a place of prayer. And We committed Ibrahim and Isma`il (Abraham and Ishmael) to cleanse My House from defilement for those who go round it in procession, and for those who retreat for religious observance, and for those who kneel in supplication and prostrate in acknowledgement of the omnipotence of Allah.
    126. Then Ibrahim devoutly and humbly supplicated Allah to bless the town of Makkah. He prayed, “I beseech You, Allah my Lord, to make this town a safe retreat that affords security and peace. And provision its people with the earth’s fruits, favoring those among them who believed in Allah and in the Day of Judgment.” Then Allah said, “But also he who disbelieves, I will make him enjoy up to a predetermined time, then I will drive him into Hell. How miserable is his destiny!”
    127. And as Ibrahim and Isma`il were laying the foundation of the Sacred House, they prayed, “O Allah our Lord, accept this service from us. You are Ever-Hearing, Ever-Knowing.
    128. “And make of us both, O Lord, two Muslims who conform their will to Your will, and of our descendants a Muslim nation who conform their will to Your will. And show us our rites and turn to us in mercy. You are the Relenting, the Ever-Merciful.
    129. “And send in their midst, O Lord, a messenger from among them to recite to them Your revelations, to teach them the Book, and to teach them wisdom. You are The All-Mighty, The Source of wisdom.”
    130. And who would reject Ibrahim’s creed but a foolish simpleton? We have preferred him in this world, and Hereafter he will be among the virtuous and righteous.
    131. When Allah said to him, “Surrender to My will,” he answered, “I surrender myself to Allah, Creator of the universe, Lord of the worlds.”
    132. Then Ibrahim enjoined this rich legacy on his sons, as later did his grandson Ya`qub (Jacob). They both enjoined on their sons the same creed. “My sons,” they said, “Allah has chosen for you the religion that you are enjoined to observe and practice. Therefore, adhere to it so that you can surrender to Allah.”
    133. Or were you present when Ya`qub lay on his deathbed and said to his sons, “Whom will you worship after I have departed life?” They said, “We will revere and venerate Allah, your God and the God of your fathers Ibrahim, Isma`il, and Ishaq (Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac), One God to Whose will we surrender.”
    134. These were a people who have passed away. They are accountable for their deeds and you are accountable for yours, and you will not be responsible for their deeds.
    135. Yet once more the People of the Book say, “Be Jews or Christians, and thus you will be guided to all truth.” Say to them, Muhammad, “Rather the religion of Ibrahim, the true and straightforward. Never did he associate other deities with Allah.”
    136. O Muslims, declare (in explicit terms), “We believe in Allah and we believe in all that has been sent down to us in the Qur’an, and in all that was sent down to Ibrahim and Isma`il, Ishaq and Ya`qub (Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and Jacob), and to the tribes (or grandsons) of his twelve sons and to Musa (Moses) and `Isa (Jesus). And we believe in all that was imparted to all the prophets from their Lord. We do not discriminate one of them from another and we submit our will to His will.”
    137. So, if they faithfully believe in the divine principles to which you adhere, then they have been guided. But if they turn away and then are in opposition, Allah will guard you from their inequities. He is The Ever-Hearing, The All-Knowing.
    138. Say to them, “This is the religion from Allah, and who has a fairer religion than Allah? And we are His worshipers.”
    139. Say to them, “Do you argue with us about Allah when He is our Lord and your Lord? We are accountable for our deeds and you are accountable for yours! And to Him we are faithful.”
    140. Or do you claim that Ibrahim and Isma`il, Ishaq, and Ya`qub (Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and Jacob) and the tribes (or grandsons) were Jews or Christians when you know that the Tawrah and Injil were sent down to Musa (Moses) and `Isa (Jesus) long after them? Do you know better than Allah, The Ever-Hearing, The All-Knowing? Who is more unjust than he who hides with himself or suppresses a verbal or inscribed attestation from Allah? And Allah is not unaware of all that you do.
    141. These were a people who have passed away. They are accountable for their actions and you are accountable for yours, and you will not be responsible for their deeds.
    142. And the foolish among mankind will say, “What made the Muslims change their qiblah, the direction to which they turn at prayer?” Say to them, “To Allah belong the East and the West; He guides whom He wills to the straight path.” 
    143. Thus have We made a middle nation (Ummah) of you Muslims to be witnesses of peoples, and the Messenger will be a witness of your actions. And We only set up Jerusalem initially as the qiblah toward which you turned in prayer in order to distinguish those who obey the Messenger and to expose the disobedient, albeit it was hard on everybody except those who bowed to Allah as their guide. Allah was neither going to annul nor render unprofitable your religious virtues, for Allah is Ever-Compassionate, Ever-Merciful to mankind.
    144. We have seen you, Muhammad, turning your face to heaven. Thus, We will appoint for you a qiblah that will meet your expectation. Therefore, turn your face in prayer toward the Sacred Mosque—the Ka`bah at Makkah—and wherever you people may be, turn your faces to it. As for those who were given the Book, they know this to be the truth from their Lord, and Allah is not unaware of all that they do.
    145. If you, Muhammad, were to present the People of the Book with every sign or a multitude of signs for your prophethood, they will never follow your qiblah, nor will you follow theirs, nor will they follow each other’s qiblah. And should you be tempted to follow their wishes after all that has been imparted to you, then you will have been one of the unjust.
    146. In fact, the People of the Book, to whom We gave the Book, recognize it as much as they are able to assert the identity of their sons, but some of them hide what they know to be the truth.
    147. But the truth has proceeded to you, Muhammad, from your Lord. Therefore, do not permit their intentional assertion of what is false make you a wrangler.
    148. Every one, individually or in a group, is distinguished by attributes that characterize him or the group with a particular aim or direction, so the cause for which you should be ready to contend to your life’s end is good will and righteous deeds. One day, wherever you may be, Allah will bring you all together to His majestic presence. He is indeed All-Powerful over everything.
    149. And whenever you, Muhammad, depart from a place, turn your face at prayer toward the Sacred (Inviolable) Mosque, for it is indeed the truth proceeding from Allah your Lord, and Allah is not unaware of all that you do.
    150. Again, whenever you depart from a place, always turn your face at prayer toward the Sacred Mosque. And wherever any of you or all of you may be, turn your faces at prayer toward it so that you people do not stand criticized by others except by the wrongful. Do not fear them, but fear and revere Me so that I may perfect My favor upon you and you may be guided.
    151. We have sent to you people a messenger from among you to recite to you Our revelations, and to cleanse you, and to teach you the Book and wisdom, and to teach you what you did not know. 
    152.  Therefore, remember Me so that I remember you, and thank Me and do not disbelieve Me.
    153. O you who believe, seek consolation in patience and in prayer. Surely, Allah is with the patient.
    154. Do not consider the martyrs in Allah’s cause to be dead. They have acquired the glorious privilege of martyrdom. Do not say they are dead, for they are alive in the Lord’s providence, but you do not perceive this fact.
    155. We will make you experience fear and hunger to some extent, and some loss in wealth and in lives, and a diminished yield in the fruit of the earth. But announce, Muhammad, blissful tidings to the patient—the persistent who are constant and unwearied in the face of difficulties and hindrances—
    156. Who remember Allah when a misfortune or calamity befalls them and they say, “To Allah we belong and to Him we will return.”
    157. Those are the recipients of the efficacious grace of their Lord, Who has conferred His blessings and mercy, and these are guided by Providence to all truth.
    158. Behold, the mounts of Safa and Marwah in Makkah are in fact divine way markers of Allah. Therefore, he who goes on hajj (pilgrimage) to the Mosque or on `umrah (minor pilgrimage), incurs no blame to go round them both in procession, and he who offers charity of his own accord will find Allah responsive to people’s pious actions. He is The All-Knowing.
    159. Indeed, those who keep from the knowledge of others the clear and plain evidence that We presented to the people in the Book and conceal the clear signs that guide out of darkness, have come within the curse of Allah. These have earned the curse of Allah and of those—the angels and the pious—whose curse takes effect against whom it is uttered.
    160. But such misfortune would be canceled in favor of those who repent, make amends, and declare the truth. Such persons will come into My grace. It is I Who accept true repentance. I am The Ever-Merciful.
    161. Those who have disbelieved and have died in disbelief, have come within the measure of the curse of Allah and of the angels and of all mankind.
    162.  Such curse will follow them eternally. They will be shackled and put to the torment that will not abate, nor will they be given respite.
    163. Your Allah is One God; there is no God but Him, The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    164. The creation of the heavens and the earth; the variation in duration and the constant alternation and succession of the night and day; the ships afloat on the seas, navigating to transport what people profit themselves with; the rain that Allah sends down from heaven, with which He revives the earth after it suffers death; the animate beings of all sorts that He scattered over it; the air circulating in various directions with varying degrees of force, weight, and pressure; and the clouds floating at various heights in the upper air, circulating in servitude between the heaven and the earth—all these are indeed signs of omnipotence sensed by those who reflect. 
    165. Yet among people are those who equal deities with Allah and regard them with the same love and devotion that are due only to Allah. But those who believe maintain more love for Allah. And if only the unjust who do wrong could see the torture that awaits them, they would realize that to Allah belongs all power, and that omnipotence is His own, and that Allah indeed punishes severely.
    166. Then those who were followed will declare their innocence from those who followed their path. And as they both see with their own eyes the penalty being imposed for the evil that they worked, the ties of their fanciful belief will be severed.
    167. Then those who followed (as adherent disciples) will say, “If only we could have the chance to go back to life below, we would renounce them and their errors as they have renounced us.” Thus does Allah show them that their evil deeds now represent nothing but regrets, and they will never be released from Hell.	
    168. O you people, eat of what is on earth. It is replete with choice of all delights. And enjoy all that is pure, lawful, and wholesome. And do not follow the footsteps of Satan; he is indeed your avowed enemy.
    169. He incites you and commands you to commit yourselves to an evil line of conduct and disregard the horror of immorality, and to relate concerning to Allah what you do not know.
    170. And when the disbelievers are told to follow what Allah has revealed and accept it, they say, “We only follow the particular system of faith and worship that our fathers followed.” But how will it be if their fathers had lacked sound judgment and had missed the path of rectitude!
    171. The negative response of those who disbelieve is similar to the one who shouts to those who can hear only loud calls and cries. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they cannot consider anything.
    172. O you who believe, eat the worthy foods that We have provisioned you with, and be grateful to Allah, if indeed it is He Whom you worship.
    173. He only forbids you to eat the flesh of a dead beast, and blood, the flesh of swine, and the flesh of a beast slaughtered under the invocation of a name other than Allah. But if you eat such things under compelling circumstances, not through willful disobedience and transgression, no sin is incurred. Allah is indeed Forgiving and Merciful.
    174. Those who keep back the clear and plain revelations that Allah revealed in the Book and exchange the truth for the worthless vanity of the world, simply consume nothing but fire in their bellies. Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Judgment, He will not absolve them from guilt, and they will be put to painful torment.
    175. Those are the ones who have exchanged the guidance of Providence to the path of rectitude for the perplexed path in the maze of error, and forgiveness and mercy for torment and torture. How persistent they are in casting themselves headlong into Hell!
    176. That is because He has sent down the Book with the truth, and those who disputed its precepts have set themselves at variance and discord.
    177. Conformity of life to the requirements of the divine Law and righteous living does not simply mean turning your faces in prayer toward the east or the west. Rather, it entails belief in Allah, the Day of Judgment, the angels, the Book, and the prophets; and that you spend of your wealth, for the sake of Allah, in benevolence and benefaction on the poor among your kindred, on the orphans, on those in need, and on the wayfarer who has no means of transportation, on those who request aid in times of difficulty or distress, and on redeeming and setting free those who are completely divested of freedom; that you worship with appropriate acts and rites; that you give zakah; that you fulfil your promise when you make one; and that you exercise patience when befallen with a misfortune or calamity, and during the distress of warfare against your enemies. Those are the ones who have characterized themselves with faithful qualities and who are pious.
    178. O you who believe, a rule for retaliation is decreed for you to observe in the case of willful murder thus: the free man for the free man; the slave for the slave; the woman for the woman. But if the charge is dropped by the fellow member (co-religionist) who is in a position to forgive, then forgiveness should go hand in hand with sound judgment, and the demands should be agreeable to reason as judged appropriate to the circumstances. And the blood guilty should answer the demand in good will, with liberality and generosity. This is an admission of relaxation advanced by Allah your Creator, in mercy to you. But he who transgresses thereafter will be put to severe torment.
    179. O you who reflect, you have in the law of retaliation a bond with restraining force that puts a check on willful murder, redresses your grievances, and confers on you protection and security, so that you may be pious and fear Allah.
    180. A rule is decreed. When any of you feels death approaching and he possesses any wealth, then he shall bequeath part of it equitably to the parents and next of kin with beneficence. This is an obligation laid on those who are pious.
    181. So whoever changes the deceased’s equitable and just bequest after he has heard it shall incur sin. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
    182. But if he fears that the testator was unfair or motivated by vice, and he tries to redress the wrong and bring peace among those concerned, he shall incur no sin. Allah is Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    183. O you who believe, fasting is decreed for you to observe, as it was decreed for those who came before you, so that you may be pious.
    184. It is a religious observance that lasts for a fixed number of days. But those of you who are sick or on a journey shall compensate the fast by the same number of days at a later date. As for those who experience hardship caused by fasting, they should offer expiation of feeding an indigent. But, he who offers to do good of his own accord will find it indeed rewarding; and if you can fast, it profits you, if only you knew.
    185. The month of fasting is Ramadan, during which the Qur’an was sent down to guide people to all truth. Its clear and plain revelations guide mankind out of darkness, and its precepts are the standard to judge right or wrong. Therefore, he who perceives the birth of the moon shall begin to fast. But he who is sick or on a journey shall fast the same number of days at a later time. Allah purposes to put you at ease and not make you experience discomfort. He wants you to complete the course of fasting so that you praise Allah for His guidance to the path of rectitude and that you thank Him.
    186. Should My servants ask you about My attributes, then I am in their immediate proximity; I respond favorably to the humble petitioner’s prayer when he addresses Me. But those who aim at My blessings are to respond favorably to My system of faith and worship and believe in Me, that they may be guided to the path of rectitude.
    187. It is lawful for you to approach your wives, if you will, on the nights of fasting. They are a source of comfort to you, as you are to them. Allah knows you used to deceive yourselves, and in His infinite mercy He pardoned your offense. Therefore, now you may feel free to approach them, and follow the laws ordained by Allah. And you may eat and drink until you can distinguish between the black thread of night and the silver streak of dawn, and thenceforth you fast until darkness prevails at the close of daylight. Refrain from going in to them while in religious retreat in the mosques. These are the limitations imposed by Allah; therefore, do not transgress them. Thus, Allah expresses His revelations to people so that they may be pious.
    188. And do not usurp others’ possessions wrongfully and unlawfully and present it to those in authority to bribe them and purchase their decision so that you sinfully devour a part of peoples’ possessions while you are aware of your evil doings.
    189. They call upon you, Muhammad, to inform them about the new moons. Say to them, “They are indicators of the point and passage of time in the material universe, and for reckoning the time when the pilgrimage (hajj) to the House is to be performed.” You people must realize that it is not in conformity with righteous living that you enter houses from the back doors; this is a groundless and irreligious notion. What is in conformity with the requirements of the divine Law is that you enter houses from the proper doors. And be pious and fear Allah so that you may prosper.
    190. And fight in the cause of Allah those who fight against you, but do not transgress. Allah dislikes the transgressors.
    191. Kill them wherever you find them, and drive them out from where they drove you out, since persecution for adherence to a particular religious belief is worse than murder. But do not fight them at the Sacred Mosque unless they fight you there, and if they do, then kill them, for such action would be the recompense of the disbelievers.
    192. But if they desist from their hostilities, they will find that Allah is indeed Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    193. And fight them until persecution ends and concord replaces discord, and the religion of Allah prevails. Therefore, if they cease their hostilities, then restrict your hostilities only to those who are unjust.
    194. If they fight you during a sacred month, then fight them back; breaking the solemn observances permits reciprocal retaliation. And if they transgress against you, then lay their transgression to their charge and trespass against them to the same extent. And be pious and fear Allah, and realize that Allah upholds those who are pious.
    195. And spend in the cause of Allah, and do not cast yourselves into ruin with your own hands; and do good deeds, for Allah likes those who do good.
    196. And complete the rites of the hajj and of the `umrah (minor pilgrimage) if you started them, unless your course has been obstructed by your enemies or you have fallen sick. Under the circumstances, you shall present whatever offering you can get with ease as a complement of your journey of devotion to Allah. And do not shave your heads or shorten your hair before the offering has reached its destination (the Sacred Mosque) and has been sacrificed and distributed among the poor. But in these circumstances, the sacrifice is made where you are. And he who is sick or suffers an ailment of his scalp may shave his head or shorten his hair before, providing he makes reparation for it. He may fast for three days (in the usual manner from dawn till sunset), or feed six indigent persons, or sacrifice an offering and distribute it among the poor. But under peaceful conditions, he who makes the `umrah and wishes with contentment to remain till hajj shall be obliged to present an offering such as he can afford. But if he cannot find the suitable object to offer or he does not have the means, then he shall fast three days while in Makkah and seven days on returning home, that is ten days in all. This is a duty incumbent only on him whose family does not reside within the environs of the Ka`bah. And be pious and fear Allah and realize that Allah punishes severely.
    197. The rites of the hajj are observed during certain known months, ending by the primary object of this religious devotion in the first ten days of Thul-Hijjah when pilgrimage to the Ka`bah is made and the chief rites are commonly observed. Therefore, he who takes upon himself to make hajj shall not engage in worldly matters until all the devotional rites have been performed. No sexual matters, indecencies, or wrangling are permitted during hajj. And whatever good deed you do is known to Allah. And fit yourselves out with what is necessary for the purpose, but the best provision indeed is piety. And fear Me, you people with intellects.  
    198. You are absolved to trade for livelihood, betaking yourselves to Providence for His bounty. And when you throng back from Mount `Arafat, then praise Allah thankfully at the (Sacred) Inviolable Mount—Muzdalifah—and thankfully extol His glorious attributes for steering you to the path of rectitude although before that you were lost in error.
    199. It is mandatory that you throng back from Mount `Arafat, from where people throng back. And invoke Allah for forgiveness, for Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful, indeed.
    200. And when you have concluded your religious devotions and rites of hajj, then extol the glorious attributes of Allah, as you customarily praised your forefathers (in pagan times). But Allah’s praises and glorious attributes should be extolled with the deepest feeling. Nonetheless, among people are those whose thoughts are set upon the mundane things of this world; they invoke Allah to bestow upon them the comforts of life, and, consequently, such persons will never have a share in the Hereafter.
    201. There are also others whose thoughts are upon both this world and the world to come. They ask Allah to bestow upon them His grace here and Hereafter and to save them from the torment of the Fire.
    202. Such persons will be apportioned the reward they merit for their deeds. Allah is swift indeed in reckoning.
    203. And remember Allah on three specific days at the conclusion of hajj. As this is optional, you incur no blame if you should leave Makkah two days earlier or days later than the due date, for those who are pious. So be pious and fear Allah, and know that you will be gathered to Him.
    204. Among people there is he whose speech on the subject of life here draws your interest and affection, and he appears to be virtuous. And to this end he testifies, with Allah as his witness, while in reality he is the worst adversary.
    205. When he turns his back and goes away, he aims to exercise his inherent corruption and create discord; and thus he reduces crops and cattle to ruins, contrary to the blessed word and ordinance of Allah, Who detests corruption.
    206. When he is told to revere Allah, he exaggerates his own account of himself and displays arrogance. This is he who best deserves ill and the abode in Hell, and how evil is the destined habitation! 
    207. Among people there is he who would gladly barter himself seeking the satisfaction of Allah, Who is the source of goodness, sympathy, and kindness to His servants.
    208. O you who believe, enter into peaceful relations with one another and do not follow the footsteps of Satan; he is indeed your avowed enemy.
    209. And should you fall away from faith and practice, or fall back into error after being guided into illumination and enlightenment, then you must realize that Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    210. Do the disbelievers intend to wait until Allah and His angels come down shadowed by a canopy of clouds before they would conform to His blessed will? But when this matter comes to pass, the final Judgment will have been pronounced. To Him, the Ultimate Authority, are committed and submitted all matters.
    211. Ask the Children of Isra'il how many clear signs We imparted to them. And he who perverts the divine favor conferred on him will realize that Allah punishes severely.
    212. Life here has been adorned for those who disbelieve, and they mock those who believe. But those who believe will be distinguished with eminence over them on the Day of Resurrection. And Allah provides whom He will without reckoning.
    213. Mankind was a single nation of common descent. Then Allah sent prophets with good tidings and as a warning to all. He sent down with them the Book of truth that guides to all truth, in order to judge between people on their differences. Yet those who disputed its precepts were the very same people who were given the Book, which imparted to them enough signs to guide, as they were inequitable among themselves. But the believers were guided by Allah, through His will, to the truth about which they differed. Allah guides whom He will to the path of rectitude.
    214. Or did you people who conformed to Islam think that you would qualify to reside in Paradise before enduring hardship and trials that determine your endurance, trials similar to those to which your predecessors were subjected? They were so stricken by misfortunes and calamities that they trembled and quaked in fear to the point that the Messenger himself and those who were with him said, “When will the promised victory from Allah come to pass?” Victory from Allah is indeed quite near. 
    215. They ask you what they should spend and to whose benefit. Say to them, “Spend in benevolence of whatever you righteously earned and regard the parents and kin, and orphans, and the needy, and the wayfarers. And Allah is All-Knowing of whatever good deeds you do.”
    216. O you Muslims, much as you dislike fighting, it is, nonetheless, decreed for you. It may happen that you dislike something and it proves beneficial to you, and it may also happen that you like something and it proves harmful to you. Allah is All-Knowing, but you are not.
    217. They ask you about fighting during the Sacred Months (Muharram, Rajab, Thul-Qi`dah and Thul-Hijjah). Say to them, “Fighting during the Sacred Month is a grave offense and disbelief in Allah, and an emphatic denial of the inviolability of the month and of the Sacred Mosque. And the expulsion of its population from it is a major offense to Allah, and persecution for adherence to a particular religious creed is worse than murder. The idolaters will continue to fight you until they succeed in forcing you to renounce your religion if they can. And he of you who reverts and dies in disbelief and such-like persons will be great losers. Their deeds are worthless here and in the Hereafter; it is these who will be companions in Hell, and they will remain in it forever.”
    218. Those who believe in Allah and those who emigrate and fight and strive in His cause justly expect mercy from Allah; and Allah is Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    219. They ask you about intoxicants and gambling. Say to them, “They both involve a major sin besides some advantages to people, but their evil outweighs their advantages.” And they ask you what they should spend in benevolence. Say to them, “Spend in benevolence of what you can spare.” Thus Allah expounds to you people His revelations and ordinances that you may ponder the consequences and results,
    220. And [that you may] contemplate their bearings on life here and in the Hereafter. And they ask you about the orphans. Say to them, “End abuses to them; it is better for them. And if you reverently mix your affairs with theirs, they are your brothers in faith. Allah knows well the one who is corrupt and the one who faithfully seeks reform. Had Allah willed, He would have afflicted you with distress; Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.”
    221. Do not marry idolatresses before they have believed in Allah their Creator. Indeed, a female slave who believes in Allah is far better than an idolatress, albeit she may attract your love. Nor should you allow your women to marry idolaters before they have believed in Allah. Indeed, a slave who believes in Allah is far better than an idolater, albeit he may attract your love. These idolaters call you to the Fire; whereas Allah graciously calls you to His Paradise and to enjoy His forgiveness. Allah expounds to people His revelations that they may remind themselves.
    222. They ask you about women’s menstrual period and whether sexual intercourse is permissible while it lasts. Say to them, “It is an unwholesome phase. Therefore, leave women alone during their menstrual period and do not approach them until they are clear of it and have purified themselves. When once they are purified, you may feel free to approach them in the manner that Allah has ordained. Allah likes those who are repentant and those who purify themselves.”
    223. Your wives are your tillage where you cultivate your crop of posterity. Therefore, go into your tillage virtuously as you will, and send good deeds before you toward your future security, and revere Allah. And realize that you are destined to be in His august presence in the Hereafter, and announce blissful tidings to the believers.
    224. And do not swear by the Eternal Name of Allah and thus make His Name an excuse for your oaths to do wrong or to refuse to make peace. Make reparation for your oath and correct the wrong. Revere Allah; Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
    225. Allah excuses you for your idle oaths, but He holds you responsible for whatever your hearts have earned. And Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing toward His creatures.
    226. And those of you who make an oath to abstain from approaching your wives must not exceed four months. Should they reconcile with their own hearts and resume their normal relationship, they will find Allah Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    227. However, if they should decide to divorce, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
    228. Divorced women shall remain for three months*—three menstrual cycles—without something (that is, reconciliation) expected or promised; and it is not lawful for them to hide what Allah might have created in their wombs if, indeed, they believe in Allah and the Last Day. Their husbands shall be entitled to take them back with ransom and resume marital life, if both agree to reconciliation. And women have as many rights as they have of obligations in equity, and men are a step higher than they are in the scale of responsibility, and Allah is All-Mighty, Ever-Wise. 
* This is the `iddah or waiting period after divorce.
    229. Divorce is permissible only twice. Then they shall have to hold together in equity or else part in kindness. And if you decide on divorce, then you men are forbidden to reclaim any part of what you gave them in the way of dower, gifts, or the like, unless you both fear you would not be able to keep the limits ordained by Allah. Then you are absolved if she wishes to buy her freedom. These are the limitations imposed by Allah, and those who transgress the limitations are unjust.
    230. If he divorces her and reclaims her twice and then divorces her again a third time, then he has no right to reclaim her in wedlock—that is if they both are so inclined—before she joins another man in wedlock. If the second husband willingly divorces her, then and only then, are they absolved to reunite in wedlock if they both believe they are able to honor the limitations imposed by Allah. These are the limitations imposed by Allah; He clearly expounds them to those who know.
    231. When you have divorced women and they have fulfilled their set period of waiting for three months (`iddah) and both of you are willing to reconcile, then either reclaim them in equity or free them in equity. Do not reclaim them for a selfish end or to spite them; and he who acts in this manner will have wronged himself. And do not take the revelations and laws of Allah mockingly. And solemnly acknowledge the divine favor that Allah conferred on you, the Book that He sent down to you, and the wisdom He imparted to you to admonish you. And revere Him, and realize that Allah is All-Knowing of all things.
    232. And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled their determined period of waiting, do not restrain them from reuniting with their separated husbands in wedlock if the women wish to reconcile their quarrel in equity. This is an exhortation incumbent on those who believe in Allah and in the Last Day. This imparts to you sanctity of manner, and you come to be vested with purity, for Allah is All-Knowing; whereas, you do not know.
    233. Mothers who have given birth shall suckle their babies for a period of two years if it is deemed necessary to complete the course of breast-feeding. It is incumbent on the child’s father, whether in married life or following divorce, to provide both mother and infant with the means of subsistence and the necessities of life, and to provide them with clothing according to his means in equity. No self is charged with spending except within its means. Nor should a mother be made to suffer on account of her child, nor should the father be made to suffer. And in the case of the father’s death, the heir shall be charged with the same responsibility. And if both parents wish to discontinue breast-feeding in the infant’s interest and decide to wean, they may do so. If it is deemed necessary to engage a wet nurse to breast-feed the child, you may do so if you do not deny the mother what is her due, nor deny the wet nurse what you promised in equity. And revere Allah and realize that Allah sees all that you do. 
    234. And in the event of a husband’s death, bereaved widows shall wait for four months and ten days, without something (that is, marriage) promised or expected, to determine if they are pregnant. When the set period (`iddah) of waiting has expired, you are absolved of what they incline to do with themselves (concerning remarriage) so long as they dispose themselves equitably. And Allah is Well-Acquainted with all that you do.  
    235. You men incur no guilt if, at this time, you indirectly advance your marriage offer for consideration, or if you only entertain the idea. Allah knows well that you think about them. But do not propose to them in secret during this set period (`iddah), but you may hold honorable conversation with them. Nor can you enter into a marriage contract until the set period has been fulfilled. You ought to realize that Allah knows well what is lodged within yourselves. Therefore, beware of Him and realize that He is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Forbearing.
    236. You incur no guilt if you divorce women before consummating the marriage and before deciding on payment of the dower. But in order to be equitable and just, you shall compensate them, the wealthy according to his means and the restrained within his means, an expression of good will. This is a duty incumbent on those whose deeds are pious.
    237. And if you divorce them before consummating marriage but after already deciding on the amount of the dower, then they are entitled to half the determined amount unless they themselves, or their representatives, grant remission of the due amount. And to grant remission is nearer to piety. Do not forget to exercise good will among yourselves. Allah sees all that you do.
    238. Observe your duty to Allah and maintain the prescribed prayers, and the middle prayer (`Asr, the afternoon prayer) and humble yourselves to Allah and obey Him.
    239. And if you experience uneasiness caused by some impending danger, you may perform your prayers on foot while walking or while riding. But when safety prevails, then perform your prayers in the manner instructed by Allah, Who made known to you what you never knew.  
    240. Those of you who feel death approaching shall bequeath to their wives the means of sustenance for a period of one year, and in case of sudden death the heir is charged with the same responsibility. In either case, the widow shall remain in his residence for the same period of one year. But should the widows choose to change their residence of their own accord after fulfilling the set period of four months and ten days (`iddah), then you incur no guilt for what they do with themselves (regarding marriage) as long as they are equitably and honorably disposed. Allah is All-Mighty, Ever-Wise.  
    241. And women who have been divorced are entitled to a reasonable suitable provision, separate maintenance. This is a duty incumbent on those who are equitable and just and pious.
    242. Thus Allah expounds to you people His revelations that you may reflect.  
    243. Have you not seen into the event of those who fled their dwellings by the thousands in the face (of hostile action by the enemy of faith in fear) of death? Consequently, Allah pronounced them dead. Then in mercy He restored them to life. Indeed, the efficacious grace of Allah abounds on people, but most of them show no gratitude or thanks.
    244. Therefore, fight in the cause of Allah and realize that Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
    245. Who would like to lend Allah all he can of benevolence and pious deeds, and Allah will double it for him manifold? Allah is He Who reduces to penury and gives abundantly, and you will all return back to Him.
    246. Have you not seen the chiefs among the Children of Isra'il with a prophet of their own who was sent to them after the death of Musa (Moses)? They said to him, “Send to us a king under whose power we can unite and fight in the cause of Allah.” The prophet said to them, “What if he is appointed and fighting is ordained and you refuse to fight?” They said, “But why should we not fight in the cause of Allah when we and our children have been driven out of our homes?” But when fighting was ordained, they retracted their word, with the exception of a few. But Allah is fully aware of the unjust.
    247. Their prophet then said to them, “Now Allah has appointed Talut (Saul) as your king.” But they said, “How can he be given sovereignty over us when we claim a stronger right to kingship!” Their prophet said, “Allah has chosen him to reign over you and has imparted to him a wealth of knowledge and has privileged him with a distinguished stature, and Allah delegates His authority to whom He wills. Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures’ needs, All-Knowing.”
    248. Their prophet then said to them, “His delegated authority is evidenced in the reclamation of the Ark of the Covenant, which was once lost to the enemy, carried by the angels and affording security from Allah your Lord, and comprising the relics that were left behind by the family of Musa (Moses) and the family of Harun (Aaron). This incident surely represents convincing divine evidence of Allah’s delegated authority to Talut, if indeed you are believers.”  
    249. And when Talut advanced his troops and traversed some distance, they came to a river. Talut said to his troops, “Allah has preordained that you be tested now for inclination, sincerity, and endurance. Therefore, he who drinks of the river shall be discharged from my forces, but he who does not drink shall join my forces. But he who only scoops up with his hand is excused.” Yet they all satisfied their thirst except for a few. And when Talut crossed the river with those who exercised unqualified obedience to commands, they were confronted by Jalut (Goliath). They said, “On this day we are not a match for Jalut and his forces.” But those who believed they were destined to meet Allah said, “How often, Allah willing, has a small force overcome a superior force! Allah is with the patient and persevering.”
    250. When they faced Jalut and his forces, they prayed, “O Allah our Lord, pour out upon us confidence and endurance, and help us take a firm position, and set our feet firm, and give us victory over the disbelieving people!”
    251. And so, they routed Jalut’s forces as Allah willed, and Dawud (David—then a poor shepherd and unarmed youth) slew Jalut, and by His grace, Allah conferred sovereignty and wisdom on Dawud and imparted to him the knowledge He willed. And if Allah had not repressed some people by others, indeed, the world would have been full of corruption; but the grace of Allah abounds in the universe.
    252. These are the revelations of Allah. We relate them to you (Muhammad) in truth, for you are one of the emissaries.	
    253. Such messengers as they were, We endowed with privileges, some more than others. Among them was he to whom Allah spoke, and some He graded a step higher in rank. And We sent `Isa son of Maryam (Jesus son of Mary) with the clear and plain revelations and signs. And We supported him by the Holy Spirit, Jibril (Angel Gabriel). And had Allah willed, never would have their successors fought against each other, especially after they had received the evidence. But they were in a state of discord and enmity; some believed in Allah and others disbelieved. And had Allah willed, they would not have warred against each other, but Allah does and enacts what He wills.
    254. O you who believe, spend benevolently and with benefaction in the cause of Allah before the Day comes when there will be no buying or selling, nor will friendship avail him, whoever he may be, nor will anyone be permitted to intercede on behalf of another, and the disbelievers will be the unjust.
    255. Allah, there is no god but Him, The Ever-Living, The Omnipotent Sustainer. Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. Who is he who can intercede on behalf of another in His august presence but by the grace of His permission? He knows His creatures’ current events and their coming events, and no one can comprehend anything of His knowledge nor can anything be known except as He wills. His Chair extends over the heavens and the earth, whose preservation does not weary Him, and He is The Ever-Exalted, The Ever-Magnificent.
    256. There is no compulsion in religion. Now the path of rectitude has been made distinct from the path of error. Therefore, he who disbelieves in the Taghut (false gods and false beliefs) and believes in Allah will have firmly grasped the eternal, the unchangeable, and the most secure handhold, which will never separate or break. And Allah is Ever-Hearing, Ever-Knowing.
    257. Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He guides them out of darkness into illumination and enlightenment; whereas those who disbelieve are under the guardianship of the Taghut (false gods), who lead them out of light and drive them into darkness. Such like persons will be the inmates of Hellfire, which will be their eternal abode.
    258. Have you not seen the discussion that was held by the one who argued with Ibrahim (Abraham) about his Lord, just because he was in a position of power over the kingdom that was conferred on him by Allah?  Ibrahim said, “Allah is He who gives life and death.” The man said, “So do I, I grant life and cause death.” Then Ibrahim said, “Allah causes the sun to rise in the east; so then, cause it to rise in the west.” And there the presumptuous disbeliever was thrown into confusion, and Allah does not guide the unjust.
    259. Or again, his example is similar to the one who passed by a town  that was empty of life, and he could see nothing but the remains of decayed and fallen buildings. Then he exclaimed, “How will Allah restore life after it has suffered death?” Then Allah caused his death for a hundred years and then brought him back to life and asked him, “How long do you think you have been dead?” The man said, “In all probability, a day or even less.” “But,” said Allah, “you have been dead for a hundred years. And now look at your food and drink, none of them decomposed; and look at your donkey and see how it disintegrated and was reduced to fragments of bones. We will make of you a sign for mankind. And now look at the bones and see how We construct them and clothe them with flesh.” And when the man witnessed Allah’s omnipotence and authority, he said, “Now I realize that Allah is Able to do all things.”
    260. And once Ibrahim (Abraham) spoke to Allah and said, “O Lord, show me how you bring the dead back to life!” Allah said, “Do you not believe in the resurrection?” “Indeed I do,” said Ibrahim. “This is not to satisfy doubts but to satisfy my heart.” “Then,” said Allah, “take four birds and tame them to get accustomed to you. Then cut them into pieces, place each piece on a different mountain, and call them to you. They will swiftly take wing, and this should make you realize that Allah is indeed All-Mighty, All-Wise.”
    261. The example of those who spend of their wealth in divine service is similar to a sown individual grain of corn that grows seven ears, each ear carrying a hundred grains. And Allah reimburses many times the like to whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures’ needs, Ever-Knowing.  
    262. Those who spend of their wealth in divine service and do not follow up the favors with reproach or hurt will have no fear, nor will they come to grief.
    263. In fact, a kind word of friendliness and forgiveness is far better than benevolence followed by hurt. And Allah is Ever-Affluent, Ever-Forbearing.
    264. O you who believe, do not render void (the divine reward that you merit for) your benevolence by hurt. You are then like him who spends of his wealth ostentatiously under the guise of benevolence, while in truth he believes neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. His example is similar to a rock covered with dust that has been exposed to torrential rain, which stripped it of its soil, leaving it completely bare. Such persons are unable to reclaim anything of what they have (falsely) earned. And Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
    265. The example of those who spend of their wealth in divine service, seeking the satisfaction of Allah and confirming their belief, is similar to an orchard at a high elevation. The orchard is exposed to a heavy shower that makes it yield double its normal produce. And if it is not exposed to a heavy shower, it catches the light showers. And Allah is Ever-Beholding of all that you do.
    266. Would any of you like to have an orchard of date palms and vines, and rivers streaming from beneath it, providing him with diversified fruit trees, and when he has advanced in age and his progeny are feeble, the orchard is struck by a fiery whirlwind that burns it away? Thus Allah expounds to you people His signs that you may ponder.
    267. O you who believe, spend of the lawful and the good things that you have earned and of the produce that We made the soil yield for you. And do not choose the bad part of it to expend, when you yourselves would reluctantly accept it except with your eyes shut. And know that Allah is Ever-Affluent, Ever-Praiseworthy.
    268. Satan leads you to expect poverty and commands you to commit evil acts; whereas Allah promises you forgiveness from Him and efficacious grace. And Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures’ needs, Ever-Knowing.
    269. Allah confers wisdom on whom He wills, and he who is gifted with wisdom has, indeed, been endowed with overflowing goodness and all grace. But no one reflects except those endowed with intellects to know, to remember, and to judge.
    270. And whatever you spend—be it large or small in amount—or whatever you vow to solemnly undertake comes to the knowledge of Allah. And the unjust will have no protectors to help them.
    271. If you perform benevolent acts openly, it is meritorious. But if you conceal your charitable acts when you give in benevolence to the needy, it is better for you. Such acts expiate some of your wrongs by benefits, and Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do.
    272. It is not your responsibility to guide the strayed to the path of rectitude, but it is Allah Who guides whom He wills to His path of rectitude. And whatever you spend in divine service is but an advantage to you; that is, if what you spend is truly intended to fulfill your obligation to Allah and to satisfy your hearts. And whatever you spend in benevolence will be reimbursed in your favor, and you will not be done an injustice.
    273. Among you are those who are poor. They have been restrained from earning their livelihood because they participated in the war of belief against unbelief. They keep their countenance, exhibiting to those unacquainted with them an expression of happiness and satisfaction because their modesty obstructs their tongues. You know them by their countenance; they do not solicit people for charity. And whatever you spend in divine service comes to the knowledge of Allah.
    274. Those who spend of their wealth day and night in divine service, whether they do it secretly or openly, will be rewarded from their Lord. They will have no basis for fear, nor will they come to grief.
    275. Those who eat up riba (interest) take up a position and they assume the attitude that is worn only by one smitten by Satan$. That is because they say, “Just as trade is a means of livelihood, so is riba.” But whereas Allah permitted trade, He utterly forbade riba. Therefore, he who listens to the admonition from Allah his Lord and restrains himself may keep the gain he made in the past, and Allah mercifully decides their end. But those who relapse into this evil practice will be the inmates of Hell eternally.
    276. Allah expunges riba but repays charitable acts generously. And Allah does not love every disbelieving, vicious person.
    277. Those who believe, do good deeds, faithfully observe their prayers, and give zakah (poor-due) will be rewarded from their Lord, and no fear will fall upon them, nor will they come to grief.
    278. O you who believe, be pious and fear Allah, and relinquish the amount owed to you in riba if you are, in fact, believers.
    279. And if you do not obey this rule, then you must expect war from Allah and from His Messenger. But if you repent, then you are entitled only to the principal that you lent, so that you do not do injustice to others nor be done an injustice.
    280. And if the debtor experiences difficulty or pecuniary embarrassment, then give him respite until he is at ease and is able to return the debt. And if you are able to cancel the debt or a part of it in benevolence, you will merit the grace of Allah, if you only knew.
    281. And guard yourselves from the Day when you are returned to Allah and each self will be requited for its deeds, and no one will be done injustice.
    282. O you who believe, if you become involved in a debt payable at a fixed date—be it a loan, or a thing borrowed or bought on credit, or a business transaction—then commit it to writing. A scribe shall draw up the agreement or contract between the parties with recourse to the general principles of justice. No scribe shall refuse to fulfil this function, as Allah taught him it; he simply writes and the debtor dictates, and he should be pious and fear Allah, and he shall not decrease any amount of what is agreed upon. If the debtor is foolish, weak, or incapable of dictating, then his guardian shall dictate according to equity. And select two of your men to be formally present as witnesses to the transaction. If two men are not available, then one man and two commendable women as witnesses so that later on, if one of the women errs, the other will remind her of the correct testimony. And those who were called upon to witness the transaction must not refuse when they are called in for evidence in the future. And do not be reluctant to commit the debt, small or large, to writing, indicating the due date. This course is closer to general principles of justice, more solid as evidence, and nearer to freeing you from doubt. This is mandatory unless it be a piece of business involving merchandise that you exchange with one another, or you are managing it together at immediate cash rate; then you are absolved if you do not commit it to writing. But when you dispose of merchandise to a buyer for a price, then such transactions must be witnessed. And no scribe or witness should be made to suffer any harm; and if you inflict harm, then this is immorality. And be pious and fear Allah. He teaches you and He is Ever-Knowing of all things.
    283. And if you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then place a pledge in the creditor’s possession as a guarantee of good faith. And if the debtor considers the creditor a credible person, then the creditor should prove himself trustworthy and return the pledge upon receiving the debt from the debtor, who is also expected to be trustworthy. And both of them should be pious and fear Allah their Lord. And do not withhold testimony; and he who withholds testimony has, indeed, a sinful heart. And Allah is Ever-Knowing of all that you do. 
    284. To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth, and whether you express your thoughts or conceal them, Allah will make reckoning with you of them (on the Day of Reckoning). He will then extend His mercy and forgiveness to whom He wills and put to torment whom He wills, and Allah is Ever-Determiner over everything.
    285. The Messenger believes in all that has been sent down to him from Allah, and so do the believers. They all believe in Allah, and in His angels, His Books, and His messengers; and they explicitly declare, “We do not discriminate one messenger from another.” And they say, “We have heard Your message and we obey all Your laws (and all the ordinances that You have decreed.) O Lord, kindly extend to us Your mercy and forgiveness; to You is the destiny.”  
    286. Allah does not charge a self but with what it can bear; it will reap the fruit it merits for what it acquired, and it will pay the debt with which it burdened itself and be paid its deserts. (Pray:) “Our Lord, do not take us to task if we forget or make mistakes. And our Lord, do not overburden us with difficulties as You imposed on those who came before us. And charge us not, our Lord, with what we cannot bear, and be clement to us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Patron; help us gain victory over the disbelieving people.”


   

