SURAH 3
AL IMRAN
The Family of `Imran
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    In the narration it presents, the Ever-Glorious Qur’an speaks about Allah’s signs in the universe and the lessons that can be concluded from them. It also clarifies many aspects of faith, rules, and morals. In the previous surah, some aspects of the history of the Children of Isra'il and of their perversions are narrated. This surah mentions some other aspects of their deception and perversion. It also guides people to the faith and behavior to which the believer should adhere, explains the reality of the divine religion, points out the manners of arguments, and mentions the reactions that people show at times of victory and of defeat. It shows the position of martyrs on the Day of Resurrection, the rewards for both males and females, and the road to prosperity.
    This surah begins with the same first verse as the previous surah.
    
    
    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). These are letters from the Arabic alphabet mentioned to draw attention to the fact that this miraculous Qur’an is composed of the same letters so that the people may contemplate.
    2. Allah, there is no god but Him, and all that exists in the universe attests to this. He is The Ever-Living, The Omnipotent Sustainer.
    3. He has revealed to you, Muhammad, the Qur’an in truth and in agreement with reality, corroborating and authoritatively validating the authentic books previously revealed, the Tawrah and the Injil (the Books revealed to Musa [Moses] and `Isa [Jesus], respectively).
    4. All Scriptures were revealed earlier in the spirit of truth in order to guide people to all truth; yet people set themselves at variance to them. So there came the Qur’an to distinguish right from wrong and to impart sound judgment in the choice of means and ends and in the choice between what is morally good and bad. Hence, it is the truthful, everlasting Book. Therefore, those who disregard Allah’s revelations and signs that He makes obvious to the senses will suffer grievously. Allah is All-Mighty. He justly avenges His right.
    5. Surely, Allah knows everything. There is absolutely nothing that can be hidden from Allah, be it on earth or in the heavens.
    6. He it is Who forms you and fashions you inside the womb as He wills and determines the characteristics of your form and appearance. There is no god but Him, The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.
    7. It is He Who has revealed to you, Muhammad, the Qur’an with verses that are precise and exactly defined. These constitute the essential part and the groundwork of Allah’s system of faith and worship and unequivocal understanding and obedience from every being with intellect. Other verses are allegorical, which puzzle some people, especially those who do not have sound knowledge. These verses were revealed to urge scholars to acquire knowledge, contemplate, and think deeply on the signs of the universe and religion. Those with malignant and perverse hearts choose to follow only the allegories, to interpret them as they please. Motivated by malice, they present the interpretation that causes dissension and discord when no one knows the exact interpretation but Allah. But those with well-founded knowledge, acquainted with the facts, declare their firm belief in the Qur’an and say, “It is all disclosed by Providence.” But none reflect except those with sound minds that do not bend to wishes or whims—
    8. Who pray, “O Allah our Lord, we beseech You not to erase piety from our hearts after You have made us true believers and guided us to the path of righteousness. O Allah, extend to us Your mercy; it is You Who gives and it is You Who bestows gratuitously.
    9. “You have ordained, O Allah our Lord, that You will assemble all people together to Your august presence on that inevitable Day to make a reckoning of everyone according to what he did. Blessed be Allah Who unfailingly fulfills His promise!”
    10. Neither wealth nor progeny will be of value or advantage, on the Day of Judgment, to those who deny Allah. Nor will these privileges protect them from Allah; such persons will be the fuel feeding the Fire.
    11. What becomes of them compares to what became of the people of Pharaoh and those who preceded them who refused to recognize Our revelations and signs that evince Our omnipotence and authority. Consequently, Allah seized them with a calamity and destroyed them in requital of their iniquities. With justness does Allah punish severely.
    12. Say, Muhammad, to those disbelievers who deny Allah, “You will be reduced to submission here, and be banished to Hell hereafter. And how evil is the destined habitation!”
    13. There is an 'ayah (a lesson) to comprehend. Two forces met on the day of Badr: a believing one fighting in favor of Allah and spreading the truth, and the other disbelieving fighting against Allah. Their pursuit of an end and their unwavering and positive stand merited the Muslims aid at the hands of Allah to the end that the enemies of faith were divinely induced to see the Muslims to be twice as many as themselves. Thus, they were horrified and defeated. Allah confirms whom He wills and gives them supremacy and superiority, and He bestows victory. This is, indeed, an instructive lesson to those who have opened their eyes, which do not deviate from the truth.
    14. People are instinctively allured by a passion for women and children, for amassing gold and silver, for owning purebred horses and an abundance of cattle and fertile land. All in all, these are simply the ephemeral pleasures of life below; whereas in heaven’s realm pleasures are eternal, and the abode is an atmosphere of delight, which is promised to Allah’s servants who fight in His cause.
    15. Say to them, Muhammad, “Shall I inform you of what excels that which allures your eyes here? Paradise beneath which rivers flow is unsurpassed in beauty and supreme bliss, destined to those who revere Allah and revere Him as He deserves. They will have passed through nature to eternity companioned by mates of their design, pure and holy, fellows of their piety. Above all, they come in Allah’s grace and win His satisfaction and esteem. Allah is Vigilant. He keeps a watchful eye upon His creation and upon the way people conduct themselves in life. 
    16. This reward will be given to those whose hearts have been filled with faith and who are vested with the cardinal virtues, praying to Allah for forgiveness. Thus, they say, “O Allah our Lord, we responded to Your call and believed in You. We pray and beseech You to forgive our iniquities and protect us from the torment of the Fire.”
    17. It is they who are patient and unwearied in the face of difficulties, who habitually tell the truth with their words, deeds, and intentions. It is they who are obedient and submissive to the will of Allah, who are charitable in divine service. They are the devout who pray to Allah and beseech His forgiveness far into the night and before the day dawns, and who attentively meditate on the glory of the Creator.
    18. Allah’s unique undeniable creation corroborates His statement that there is no god but Him Who handles the matters of His creation with justice, and the angels and the knowledgeable attest to this. He exercises His authority and power in maintenance and vindication of right. His wisdom extends to everything.
    19. The religion, the system of faith and worship, commended by Allah is Islam—man’s recognition of Allah’s omnipotence and authority and His power to control destiny and the acceptance of this feeling as a standard of life. Yet not until they had received knowledge of the truth did the People of the Book (Jews and Christians) fall into dispute and become divided through mutual envy and ill intention. He who disregards Allah’s revelations and visible signs will find that Allah is indeed swift in executing the law.
    20. If the People of the Book argue with you, Muhammad, and maintain their irreverent position by adducing their unfounded reasons, then say to them, “I have vowed to resign myself to Allah and I have conformed my will and my reason to His blessed will, and so have those who follow me.” Say to them and to the illiterates [Arab pagans], “Are you now satisfied with what you heard, and have your doubts been satisfied? If you are (satisfied), then conform to Islam.” If they do, then they are on the path of righteousness, but if they turn a deaf ear and their hearts cannot hear the truth, you are only responsible for relating the message. Allah keeps a watchful eye upon His creation and upon the way people conduct themselves in life, and He knows the attributes inherent in each and all.
    21. Indeed, those who disregard Allah’s revelations and visible signs and who in defiance of Allah wrongfully kill the prophets whom He sent to guide them and those who enjoin righteousness—they will be miserably disappointed of their expectations. Announce to them, Muhammad, the coming of a grievous torment.
    22. These are they whose deeds and actions, including the good ones, will become devoid of value here and hereafter, and no one will be their vindicaors.
    23. Have you not seen, Muhammad, the disposition of those who had their share of the Book and divine knowledge, how evasive they are! When the Qur’an is chosen as the arbiter in a dispute to settle all matters of difference, some of them turn back veering away.
    24. Those of the Jews who evaded this religion falsely imagine and then exclaim, “Fire will not touch us but for a certain number of days.” They attributed this forgery to their religion and consequently deceived themselves.
    25. So how will they react when Allah assembles them on the inevitable Day when each self will be requited with what is commensurate with its deeds? And they will not be wronged.
    26. Glorify Allah and extol and magnify Him with praise. O Prophet, exclaim, “O Allah, Who has the absolute sovereign authority over the universe with all its realms, You confer sovereignty on whom You will and You divest it from whom You will. You ennoble whom You will, and You humiliate whom You will. In Your hand rests goodness. You are Able to do all things.
    27. “You, according to the reasons and systems You laid down, cause the night to lose itself by absorption into the day and You cause the day to lose itself by absorption into the night, irrespective of the nature of the solar day, civil day, or the period of the year. You cause the living to rise from the dead, and You cause the dead to fall from life. You provide livelihood, and You provide whom You will with what You will. So, You certainly grant Your messengers and Your chosen servants whatever You promised them without reckoning.
    28. Therefore, let those believers refrain from favoring those disbelievers who deny Allah over their companions in religion. Allah will renounce him who follows this irreverent course of action, except under compelling circumstances. Then exercise caution beforehand to provide against their mischief. Allah cautions you not to draw His wrath on you. To Allah is the Destiny.
    
    29. Say to them, “Whether you conceal your thoughts and feelings and what your hearts forge, or you express them loudly or under your breath, all comes to Allah’s knowledge, and He knows all that is in the heavens and on the earth. He is Able to do all things.”
    30. On the Day when every self will be presented with a vivid picture of the deeds imprinted in life with wisdom and piety, and with a written description of the evil that was done by thoughtlessness, the self will wish it was as far from that evil as the earth’s distant ends. Allah cautions you not to draw His wrath on you, in case you will ignore Allah’s sovereignty, which is the source of goodness, sympathy and kindness to His servants.
    31. Say to them all, Muhammad, “If your claim is true that you truly love, then follow me. Then Allah will confer His grace and blessings on you and forgive your iniquities. Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.”
    32. Say to them, “Obey Allah and His Messenger.” But if they turn a deaf ear, then they must realize that Allah does not love the disbelievers.
    33. Allah has elected Muhammad to communicate His message and has made His love and mercy subsequent to obeying him. Similarly, Allah has preferred Adam, Nuh (Noah), the house of Ibrahim (Abraham), and the house of `Imran over the worlds.  
    34. He has chosen them as a chaste posterity who inherit chastity, virtues, and goodness one from the other. Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    35.Remember, Prophet, when the wife of `Imran siad, "Lord! Surely I have vowed to You what is in my belly for worshiping You. She solemnly and humbly requested Allah to accept her offering. She prayed, “O Allah, I beseech You to accept my offering. You are The All-Hearing and The All-Knowing.” 
    36. When she gave birth to the child, she said to her Creator “I am delivered of a female,” even though Allah already knew well what she had brought forth, and the male is not the same as the female. She said, “O Allah my Lord, I have called her Maryam and I beseech to You to protect her and her progeny from the outcast Satan.
    37. Allah her Lord accepted the offering and received the child with favor and under His tutelage she grew in grace and piety, and Zakariyya fostered her. Every time Zakariyya entered into her chamber in the temple, he found her well provisioned. He asked, “O Maryam, from what source do you get this unprecedented provision?” “It is from Allah,” she said. “Indeed Allah provides livelihood and fits out meritoriously whom He wills with what He wills and with what He deems without reckoning.”
    38. When Zakariyya saw what Allah had bestowed on Maryam, he prayed and beseeched Allah to grant him, by His favor and omniscience, a child, for Allah hears prayers and can fulfill them.
    39. His prayer was met with a most favorable divine response. The angels addressed him while he was at his devotions, performing his prayer in the temple. “O Zakariyya,” they said, Allah announces a happy event, the arrival of a male child to be called Yahya (John). His birth will verify that a word from Allah is all that it takes for anything material or immaterial to be. He will be a chaste master who will be great and illustrious, vindicating the Word of Allah, and a virtuous prophet whose deeds are imprinted with wisdom and piety.”
    40. Zakariyya exclaimed in surprise, “O Allah my Lord, how will I have a son when I have reached an advanced age and my wife has always been barren?” He was told, “Thus does Allah accomplish what He wills.”
    41. Zakariyya added, “O Allah my Lord, may I be given a sign.” He was told, “What indicates the fact will not to talk to people for three days. You will be able to communicate with them only by token. Meanwhile, praise Allah frequently, glorify Him, and extol His glorious attributes in the evening and in the early morning.”
    42. Remember, Prophet, when the angels addressed Maryam, “O Maryam, Allah has elected you and purified you to be the elected woman over the women of the worlds.
    43. “O Maryam, be thankful to your Creator, obedient and submissive to the will of Allah, and bow to the ground in reverence, prostrate to divine revelation, and kneel with those who kneel to do homage and honor to Allah The All-Mighty.”
    44. This narrative that the Qur’an relates to you, Muhammad, represents some of the great events of those whom Allah has chosen. You did not know nor did you see. You were not present at their meeting when they cast lots using their quills and arrows to see which of them would be the foster father to Maryam. Nor were you present when they quarreled about the question.
    45. Remember, Prophet, when the angels brought glad tidings to Maryam: “O Maryam, here we relate to you a divine edict. Allah announces a happy event, the arrival of a male child, the product of a word from Him, designated the Messiah `Isa, the son of Maryam, who will be distinguished here by prophethood and reverence, and in the  by being one of those prophets near-stationed.
    46. “He will speak to people in his cradle and in maturity, and he will be one of the righteous.”
    47. Maryam asked, “How will I have a son, O Allah my Lord, when no man has touched me?” She was told, “Thus does Allah create what He wills; when He decrees a thing He only says ‘Be’ and it is.
    48. “He will teach him the Book and the Wisdom and He will teach him the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and the Injil (which Allah revealed to him).
    49. “He will be a messenger to the Children of Isra'il, performing miraculous signs to demonstrate his delegated divine power and authority to influence their conduct and their actions.” [`Isa said,] “I will create for you from clay the figure of a bird and bring it to life, and it will be a living bird by Allah’s command. I will restore the sight of the man who is congenitally blind and heal the leper, and, with delegated divine authority, I will raise the dead by Allah’s command. I will also inform you of what you eat and of what you store in reserve in your homes. This should be enough divine evidence to bring you to acknowledge the truth of my mission if indeed you are believers.
    50. “And I have been sent to you to corroborate your faith in the Tawrah that was revealed to Musa (Moses) and to make lawful to you—by Allah’s command—some of what was forbidden before to you. Now I have come to you with convincing divine evidence to be pious to Allah and obey me."
    51. “Allah is my Lord and your Lord; so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
    
    52. But when `Isa called his people to the right path, he could sense that they inclined to disbelief, so he asked, “Who will support me in the cause of Allah?” “We are supporters of the cause of Allah,” said the disciples. “We believe in Allah. We hold you as a witness that we are Muslims.
    53. “And we beseech Allah, ‘O Allah our Lord, we believe in all that You have revealed to Your prophet, and we have followed the messenger. O Allah our Lord, include us with those who bear witness to Your prophet that he has communicated Your message.’ ”
    54. And the disbelievers among the People of the Book cleverly schemed, yet in His plan, Allah also plotted, and He is the Most Charitable Schemer.
    55. Remember, Prophet, when Allah said to `Isa, “O `Isa, I am ordaining that you depart from this life. I am taking you up to My august presence and ridding you of the troublesome blasphemers among your contemporaries. I am raising those who recognized your mission and accepted that you are My messenger to higher ranks, and I am exalting them in dignity and power above those who denied you till the Day of Resurrection when all of you will return to Me. Then I will judge between you on the points of dispute.
    56. “There and then I will put to the torment those who did not believe in the truths in this life and the , and no one will help them.”
    57. But those who believed and did good deeds, will be rewarded by Allah with what is generously commensurate with their pious deeds. Allah does not love the wrongdoers.
    58. What We have narrated to you, Muhammad, is a disclosure of facts and revelations, streaming from the Fountainhead—the Qur’an, the sublime source of all useful knowledge.
    59. So, Allah made it clear that, in Allah’s sight, `Isa is like Adam, whom He created of dust, then ordained that he be, and so he was. 
    60. This is the absolute truth, declared in words by Allah your Lord; therefore, do not let their intentional lying make you anxious.
    61. Should anyone contend with you, Prophet, about `Isa with opposing arguments, after you have received the unequivocal fact from your Creator, say to them, “Come, let us summon our sons and your sons, our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, and pray to Allah and beseech Him to curse those who intentionally assert falsehood, that is, those who claim that `Isa (Jesus) is the son of God and not Allah’s messenger.”
    62. This narrative is indeed the true story, and (emphatically) there is no god but Allah; and indeed Allah is He Who has always been and forever will be The All-Mighty and The All-Wise.
    63. Should they still turn a deaf ear and stick to their falsehood, rest assured, Muhammad, that Allah is fully aware of the corruptors.
    64. Say to them: “O People of the Book, let us come to fair terms to agree among ourselves that we venerate and worship no one but Allah and that we will not associate other deities with Him. Nor will any of us take another for a god or a guardian besides Allah.” If they turn a deaf ear, then say to them, “Do then bear witness that we conform our will to Allah’s blessed will and abstain from associating any partner with Him, and we worship none but Him alone.”
    65. O People of the Book (Jews and Christians), why continue with arguments to your life’s end about Ibrahim’s (Abraham’s) religion, whereas both the Tawrah and the Injil were not revealed till long after his time. So how can he be a Jew or a Christian? Can you not see that what you claim contradicts the reality?
    66. There, you continued with arguments about `Isa (Jesus) and Musa (Moses), whom you claim to know. So, on what grounds could you argue that Ibrahim (Abraham) is a Jew or Christian? That is a matter of which you have no knowledge. Allah is All-Knowing; whereas you do not know.
    67. Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian but an orthodox follower of Islam, the true religion. He never associated other deities with Allah.
    68. Indeed, those who best deserve a rightful claim to affinity to Ibrahim are those who followed his religion, inclusive of this prophet— Muhammad —and those who follow him. Allah loves those who believed in him and guards them, as they are His true servants.
    69. Some among the People of the Book wish they could lead the believers astray and draw them away from their religion, when in fact they alienate themselves from Allah’s purpose and path of righteousness. But they fail to perceive that the consequences of their wishes and acts will afflict them alone and will never harm the believers.
    70. O People of the Book, why do you always deny Allah’s revelations and visible signs, which prove the truthfulness of Muhammad’s prophethood, when you yourselves bear witness to their truth!
    71. O People of the Book, why do you always confuse the truth with which the prophets and divine Books came, with falsehood and never proclaim the truth in a clear and straightforward way.
    72. In their malice, some among the People of the Book urged their fellow religionists to pretend at the beginning of the day that they believe what has been revealed to you Muslims. Then at the end of the day they repudiated it, expecting that you may reject it all.
    73. They also said, “Do not trust anyone except those who follow your religion, or that they would argue with you in the Meeting with your Lord.” Say to them, Muhammad, “Indeed, the guidance comes from Allah, as He chooses it for whom He wills.” Say to them, Muhammad, “Guidance rests in the hands of Allah. He confers it on whom He wills, and Allah is All-Sufficient for His creatures and All-Knowing.
    74. “He extends His mercy to whom He wills, and He is the source of sufficient grace that abounds in whom He wills.”
    75. This is the People of the Book’s course as to religion. As to their course in money, you will find among the People of the Book him whom you can entrust with a kantar [a large amount] of gold or silver and he would return it to you on demand. Also among them is he who if entrusted with one single dinar, would not return it unless you keep asking and he may eventually be pronounced a defaulter. This is by reason of their folly and want of sense that they put into words: “We are not under any obligation to these illiterate faithless people—the Muslims.” And they intentionally lie against Allah and they know it.
    76. Indeed, they tell a lie against Allah. But he who fulfills his promise when he pledges himself before Allah to do something, who keeps the vow when he binds himself by one, who makes his words accord with his deeds, and who reveres Allah as He deserves—he will come into the grace of Allah, for Allah loves those who are pious.
    77. Those who exchange Allah’s covenant or a vow to heaven or an oath that is binding for a miserable price in the vanity of the fleeting and ephemeral world will be denied Allah’s grace hereafter. Nor will Allah address them or look at them on the Day of Resurrection. He will not bless them or forgive their sins, and there awaits them a persistent, severe torment.
    
    78. Among the People of the Book are some who seem to recite divine revelations documented in the Book in jest to distort the words from common use. They expect to imprint on your minds that these are verses of the Book, while in fact they are not. They ascribe them to Allah when, in fact, they are not Allah’s words. And they relate falsehood about Allah and they know it.
    79. In no way can a human on whom Allah confers the Book and the wisdom and the prerogative of prophethood,  demand that the people worship him apart from Allah. Rather, he would ask them to revere and venerate Allah, the Creator. This is the truth that Allah has imparted to them—the divine knowledge that they impart to people, the divine knowledge that they themselves acquire.
    80. Nor can a human ask you to take the angels and the prophets as lords. Would he command you to disbelieve Him after you have become Muslims?
    81.Say to them, Prophet, that Allah entered into a covenant with each prophet to whom He revealed a Book and gave the useful knowledge. When there comes a messenger with a Book that corroborates and authoritatively validates the authentic Books you [People of the Book] possess, they will faithfully recognize him, uphold him, and help him accomplish his mission. And they expressed the obligation to which they are bound. So now they all subscribe to this allegiance and will pledge themselves before Allah to keep the vow. So, they bear witness to this obligation, which they will relate to their people, with the aim that their people fulfill it exactly in the same way their prophets did.
    82. Therefore, those who turn away from this obligation are the perverse who are faithless and morally depraved.
    83. Is it a system of faith and worship other than that ordained by Allah that they desire, when to His blessed will all creation in the heavens and on earth has submitted willingly or unwillingly, and in the end all will return back to Him!
    84. Allah asserted the oneness of the Creator and the message, and commanded His Prophet Muhammad to declare in explicit terms, “We Muslims believe in Allah alone. We believe in all that has been imparted to us in the Qur’an and in all that was imparted to Ibrahim (Abraham) and Isma`il, to Ishaq (Isaac) and Ya`qub (Jacob), to the tribes of his twelve sons, and to Musa (Moses) and `Isa (Jesus). We believe in all that was imparted to all the prophets from Allah their Lord. We do not make any distinction between one and another, and we conform our will to His blessed will.
    85. He who adopts a system of faith and worship other than Islam simply leans on a system of faith and worship that does not stand on truth. Such a system of faith will not be accepted from him, and he will be a great loser hereafter.
    86. How will Allah guide a people who intentionally deny Him after they have recognized Him and borne witness to the truth of His Messenger’s mission? How will He guide them after they have received and accepted, then later rejected the clear and plain revelations and signs guiding out of darkness? Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness those who are wrongdoers.
    87. Those will be requited with what is commensurate with their deeds; they have incurred the curse of Allah and of the angels and of all mankind.
    88. This curse will beset them to Eternity. Their torture in Hell will not be abated, nor will their torment be put in respite.
    89. However, the penitents who humbly repented and reformed themselves so their thoughts were governed by a new and divine principle, will find that Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    90. Allah confers mercy and forgiveness upon the penitents so long as they stick to faith. Indeed, those who deny the truth after they have recognized it and are so bold as to display their disbelief by acts of sedition and hostility in defiance of piety—never will their penitence be accepted by Allah, and these are they who have been lost in the maze of error.
    91. Those who deny the truth and whom death claims when they are clothed with disbelief, none of them will be able to redeem himself from Allah’s punishment. The offer of as much gold as the earth can treasure will not be accepted from any of them in expiation for his guilt. Such persons must expect endless suffering, and they will have no vindicators.
    92. You believers will not attain piety, which you seek and which Allah accepts, until you spend in divine service of what you treasure and cherish. Whatever you spend in this respect comes to Allah’s knowledge.
    93. The Jews were critical of the Muslims for permitting the consumption of certain foods, notably camel’s flesh and camel’s milk, and claimed that these are prohibited in Ibrahim’s (Abraham’s) Law. In response, Allah says that all articles of food were lawful to the Children of Isra'il long before the revelation of the Tawrah, except what Ya`qub (Jacob) forbade to himself for personal reasons, and his children followed suit. Allah commanded His Prophet to ask them to bring a proof to what they claim from the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) if what they are negating is true. Indeed, they failed to do so.
    94. Henceforth, those who lie against Allah and intentionally assert what is false will be the wrongdoers.
    95. Allah commanded the Prophet to say to them, “Allah has declared the truth; therefore, follow the religion of Ibrahim (Abraham), the true and straightforward devotee. He never associated other deities with Allah.
    96. And it is a sign of committing oneself to the religion of Ibrahim to face the House (the Ka`bah), which he built, while performing prayers and to fulfill the duty of pilgrimage to it, as Allah says that the first house devoted specifically to divine worship and appointed to assemblies for the adoration of Allah, with appropriate acts and rites, was the house founded in Bakkah (Makkah). It has been blessed and is a guidance for all beings to all truth.
    97. It is dignified with outward and visible signs of grace, including the station of Ibrahim, where he performed the prescribed acts of devotion. Whoever comes into it will have the privilege of a sanctuary; he comes to be vested with security. The pilgrimage to there is a duty incumbent on people who can afford to do it, to do homage to and honor Almighty Allah. He who refuses to acknowledge this religious rite will be the loser and must realize that Allah is Independent of all creation, Self-Existent and Absolute.
    98. Allah commanded His Messenger to reproach the People of the Book for their disbelief, deception, and misguidance, by saying to them, “Why do you deny Allah’s revelations and visible signs that prove the truthfulness of Muhammad’s message, when Allah is Witness of all that you do?”
    99. And ask them, “Why do you stand in the way, preventing Allah’s truth from guiding people to all truth? Why do you make it your aim to pervert the truth and crook the path of righteousness to your own ends when you bear witness that this is the path where Providence is the Guide? Allah is not heedless of all that you do.”
    100. Allah made the believers aware of the suspicions raised by the unbelievers and addresses the believers: If you listen to the suspicions raised by some of the People of the Book, they will alienate you from Allah’s way. They will turn you renegades and you will leave your religion after you have embraced Islam.
    101. Imagine how bad your image will be if you disbelieve after you have adopted faith, when Allah’s revelations are narrated to you and Allah’s Messenger is in your midst! He who turns his mind to Allah and chooses to be under His guardianship will have been guided to the path of righteousness.
    102. So, you who believed in the Prophet’s mission, revere Allah in the manner appropriate to His absolute sovereignty. Revere Him as He deserves and adhere to His system of faith and worship so that when death takes you, you will have conformed your will to Allah’s blessed will as muslims.
    103. Hold firmly together and grasp the eternal and unchangeable sublime system of Allah! Grasp it and do not be discordant among yourselves. Call to mind Allah’s favor that you were enemies and He reconciled your differences; you cherished different principles and practices, and by Islam you are now in one accord. You were on the edge of the bottomless abyss of Hell and He saved you from eternal disaster. Thus Allah expounds to you His revelations so that you may be guided to His path of righteousness.
    104.The only way to hold firmly together in conformity with the teachings of the Qur’an and Sunnah is to be united in enjoining the conformity of life and conduct to the requirements of divine law, and in forbidding all that is wrongful and obscene. Such people who do so will be the prosperers.
    105. Do not be like those who neglected to enjoin the good and forbid the wrongful and obscene so that you may not be divided among yourselves as they were. They also were discordant after they had received divine revelations and signs guiding them. Such people will suffer grievously.
    106. This grievous suffering will be on the Day when countenances speak different languages. Those of the believers will be glowing with splendor and bright light, beaming with joy and hope, while others are dark and gloomy. Rebuked for want of faith, they will be told, “How could you deny Allah after you recognized Him, submitted to the truth, and received clear signs attesting to its truthfulness? You have well deserved to be put to the torment in requital of disbelief.”
    107. Whereas those whose countenances express joy and hope will be the dwellers of heaven; they will receive Allah’s infinite mercy.
    108. These revelations of Allah regarding the requital for both good doers and evil doers We narrate to you in truth, Muhammad, and it has never been Allah’s will to be unjust to people or jinn.
    109. To Allah alone belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth, and to Allah, the ultimate authority, are committed and submitted all matters and all affairs for consideration, decision, and execution here and in the hereafter.
    110. You Muslims are the best people as long as you enjoin good and forbid evil, and believe in Allah. Had the People of the Book conformed their will to Allah’s blessed will, it would have been more profitable for them. Among them are some who are true believers, but most of them are morally depraved.
    111. They will not hurt you nor will they harm you. They will only be a source of annoyance. If they war against you, they will turn tail and seek safety in flight and will not be victorious so long as you adhere to enjoining good and forbidding evil.
    112. Allah informed that they (the Jews) have been stamped with humiliation wherever they are found, except when they come to be under the guardianship of Allah and at peace with people. They drew Allah’s wrath on themselves and they were stamped with humiliation due to their denying the signs attesting to the truthfulness of Muhammad’s prophethood and their unjustifiable slaying of the prophets. They became addicted to disobedience and transgression.
    113. But in fairness to them, the People of the Book are not all alike. Among them are people who recite verses of Allah’s revelations by night and prostrate to divine revelation.
    114. They believe in the existence and oneness of Allah, believe in no god but Him, and they believe in the . They enjoin equity and justice and they condemn the bad and emulate the best. Such people are enrolled among the righteous.
    115. Whatever good they do, they will never be denied the fruit nor the reward of any deed imprinted with wisdom and piety. Allah is fully aware of them and will confer the appropriate requital on them.
    116. Indeed those who denied Allah are losers; neither their wealth nor their progeny will profit them or help them against what Allah has in store for them. These are the inmates of Hell to endure there forever.
    117. Whatever they spent in this world that was not pertaining to Allah is like the crop of farmers who were wrongdoers. Their yield was hit by an icy cold wind that reduced it perishing. It was not Allah Who did them injustice, but it was they who wronged themselves by denying the signs of faith and denying Allah.
    118. O you who believe, do not have as intimate associates a body of persons of another religion to whom you reveal your secrets; they will not hesitate to pervert you. They eagerly wish to overthrow you or bring a disaster upon you. Such hatred is in their thoughts and expressed in words, but worse is what their hearts conceal. We have made clear and plain to you that with signs if only you have sound judgment.
    119. You see how you hold the disbelievers and hypocrites dear and entertain great regard for them. You believe in all the Books that Allah has revealed while they do not. When they come face to face with you, they declare that they have conformed their will to Allah’s blessed will, but when they are apart from you, they bite their lips and their finger tips in rage. Say to them, Muhammad, “Perish you in your rage! Allah is indeed All-Knowing of all private thoughts and feelings in the chest and will requite you for them.”
    120. If fair reward falls to you, be it through victory or through martyrdom, they are envious and grieved at heart. If a disaster or a calamity befalls you, be it through defeat or barrenness, they rejoice. If you are patient and revere Allah as He deserves, you will not be hurt by their wicked plots and intrigues. Allah besets them on all sides and He is All-Knowing of all the plots they do.
    121. Remember, Muhammad, that once when you left your household early in the morning resolving to take your station for battle by the mountain of Uhud and to command your faithful followers to take their posts. And Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    122. When two sections of you almost lost heart, however, they were saved by the graceful protection of Allah, and they were steadfast in fighting. In Allah should the believers put their trust to gain victory.
    123. Allah reminds the believers of His victory He conferred on them at Badr. When they adhered to patience, He assured them that He would give them victory even though they were a humble force. And He ordered them to revere Allah so that they might be thankful.
    124. The victory was attained when the Messenger said to the believers, “Is it not enough for you to have peace of mind that Allah your Lord upholds you with an array of three thousand angels specially dispatched from heaven’s realm to support your cause?
    125. “Indeed, this support is certainly enough for you, and if you exercise patience and revere Allah, you will be able to do battle against your enemy. Should you be taken by surprise and be suddenly attacked, you will receive Allah’s aid. He will uphold you with an array of five thousand angels distinguished with onslaught.”
    126. Such an announcement of Allah’s aid was meant to be cheerful news to raise your spirits and to ease your anguish. It should have made you realize that victory is an attribute and an act of Allah, The All-Powerful, The All-Knowing Who puts everything right, and The All-Wise Who settles matters for His believing servants.
    127. Allah ordained His victory on you. He purposed to strike a part of the evil group of disbelievers at the root—and so with one single blow they would be severed—or to disgrace them and enrage their blood and put them into such a commotion that would precipitate their humiliation and defeat.
    128. It is none of your concern, Muhammad. It is all up to Allah, whether Allah relents and pardons their offense and guides them to faith, or requites them with killing and shame and punishment on Doom’s Day. They are an unjust people. 
    129. To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. He alone is The All-Powerful, and He has authority over everything. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    130. O you who believe! Do not eat up whatever interest you can get for the money you lend, doubling and redoubling the interest as you go. Revere Allah and eat up not one another’s property unjustly (in any illegal way) so that you may prosper by avoiding interest (riba), be it much or little.
    131. And save yourselves from the Fire especially prepared for those who disobey Allah’s commands and make interest (riba) lawful.
    132. Obey Allah and His Messenger so that you may come to be recipients of His mercy in this life and in the .
    133. Compete swiftly with each other for forgiveness from Allah your Lord, and for a hearty welcome in a Paradise as extensive as the heavens and the earth, specially prepared for those who piously revere Allah and fear His punishment.
    134. Those who spend in divine service in prosperity and in adversity, who suppress their anger so as not to punish those who wronged them—they are righteous. Allah likes those who are fair-doers.
    135. Those who, as soon as they commit an immoral act, large or small, recall Allah to mind and invoke His forgiveness. Who can forgive transgression of the divine Law and the offense against Allah but Allah? They do not insist on their course of action when they know it is wrong.
    136. Such persons will merit forgiveness from Allah their Lord and the life in supreme bliss in Gardens beneath which rivers flow after they have passed through nature to eternity. How excellent is the reward of those who strive for a good end!
    137. O believers! Allah’s Law was ordained on nations (disbelievers) that have passed away before you. Allah gave them respite, then took them in requital of their sins. Therefore, journey the land, you Muslims, and pause to think on what you see in order to realize the fatal consequence of the beliers.
    138. This is a proclamation for mankind in which Providence is the guide, and an admonition to those who piously revere Allah.
    139. Do not falter in your war of belief against positive unbelief, nor grieve at heart for those whom you lose in the fight, for you will gain the upper hand by Allah’s support and by your faith, if you adhere to your faith. 
    140. If you have sustained a heavy blow with injuries, do not falter nor grieve. So have the enemies suffered on the Day of Badr. We rotate fortune and alternate the days of gratification and the days of distress so that each people have their day in order that Allah may distinguish the steadfast among the believers who are immovable in faith and confer the prerogative of martyrdom on those of you who qualify. Allah does not love the unjust.
    141. And Allah purges those who have believed and of those who are hypocrites, and expunges the disbelievers who deny Him.
    142. Never reckon that you would be heartily welcomed in the realm of unsurpassed beauty and supreme bliss before Allah has distinguished among you the patient fighters who are unwearied in the face of difficulties.
    143. Before the encounter with death, you had always wished yourselves dead in the cause of Allah, and now you have seen it executed in your companions.
    144. When a report was circulated among the Muslim troops during the battle that the Prophet Muhammad was slain, this led some to entertain the idea of turning renegades and returning to idolatry. In reproach, Allah says to them: Muhammad is but a messenger like those who have passed away before him, and he will die as they died. Do you mean that if he dies or is slain in battle, you would turn renegade and return to idolatry? Indeed, he who turns back on his heels and reverses his position will never hurt Allah  in the least, but, to the contrary, he will harm himself by exposing himself to punishment, and Allah will reward the thankful.
    145. Nor can anyone die except by Allah’s permission according to a predetermined time that Allah has entered in a Book. He who sets his mind upon the mundane things for his enjoyment and content here below will be requited with what is apportioned to him in this world. He who sets his mind upon the divine things conducing to Allah’s mercy and grace hereafter will be requited with what is commensurate with his deeds of piety. We will generously reward those who are thankful.
    146. Many of the prophets fought and with them fought countless numbers of devotees whose hearts had been touched with the divine hand. Never did they falter or surrender to their enemies, nor were they disheartened in consequence of the misfortunes they experienced in the cause of Allah. Allah likes the patient who are unwearied in the face of difficulties.
    147. All they said nothing was but their invocation: “O Allah our Lord, forgive us our iniquities and the excesses into which we might have been driven. Help us take a firm position, set our feet firm in time of war, and give us victory over the disbelieving people.”
    148. In return, Allah requited them with what they merited for their deeds of piety here below and with the unsurpassed merit hereafter. Allah rewards those who perfect their illustrious toils and achieve moral excellence and benevolence.
    149. O you who believe, if you lend an ear to the disbelievers who deny Allah, or open your hearts and ears to them, they will be able to turn you renegades and you will relapse into disbelief and come to be great losers of this life and the hereafter.
    150. Indeed, Allah is your Supreme Patronizer, so fear them not. He is the Most Charitable of vindicators. 
    151. Do not falter due to the consequences of Badr. We will inspire terror in the disbelievers’ hearts and dishearten them for associating with Allah other deities that He never authorized. They are powerless, and their destined abode is Hell. Evil indeed is the destined habitation of the unjust!
    152. Allah has kept His promise to you, as was shown in your putting the enemy to rout, by His permission, until you began to falter by arguing over the Prophet’s orders not to leave your posts. Some were in favor of obeying the Prophet’s command and maintaining their posts while others went against his command and ran after booty when the Prophet was about to gain victory. Among you are those who are concerned only with the interests of life below and its mundane things, and others whose main concern is Allah’s grace hereafter. Then Allah made you draw off from the battlefield to test your true inclination and distinguish the sincere group. And He forgave you when you showed regret. Allah’s bounty abounds to the believers.
    153. Remember, believers, when you forced your way up the hill, paying attention to no one, while the Prophet in the rear called you to come to fight. There Allah requited you with grief upon grief for being balked of your booty and for fleeing in the face of danger, so that you would learn not to grieve for what you miss nor to despair for what befalls you. Allah is All-Knowing of all that you intend and do.
    
    154. Thereafter Allah replaced the sorrow with peace and a sense of security, which induced the sincere and pious of you to slumber. Others were aroused to emotion, which begot unjust ideas of Allah and a state characteristic of ignorance analogous to the ignorance of paganism. The latter kept their thoughts to themselves and said to themselves, “If we had a say in the matter we would never have been slain here in battle!” Say to them, Prophet, that indeed the affair belongs wholly to Allah in both victory and defeat. Allah alternates victory and defeat among His servants in case they adhere to the means that lead to victory or those that lead to defeat. They hide within themselves what they dare not reveal to you, saying, “If we had anything to do with the affair, none of us would have been killed here.” Say, “Even if you had remained in your homes, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death, but Allah ordained defeat upon you in Uhud so that He might test what is in your hearts and purify your hearts. And Allah is All-Knowing of all that is in your hearts.”
    155. Those of you who turned tail and abandoned their posts on the day the two forces met were but victims of Satan, who dragged them to error and took advantage of their disobedience to the Prophet and led them to their fall. However, Allah has granted them forgiveness. He is Oft-Forgiving and Forbearing.
    156. O you who believe, be not like those disbelievers who denied Allah and thought that on every occasion when they lost some of their fellow countrymen in journeys of trade or in wars, that had they been with them and remained there, they would not have died or been slain. Allah filled them with this feeling and thought in order to move their hearts to grieve. It is Allah Who gives life and death, and He sets everything to a certain destination. He is All-Knowing of all that you do, be it good or evil, and He will requite you.
    157. If you are slain in the course of a hostile encounter between belief and disbelief, or if you die in battle or from another cause, you will have merited Allah’s forgiveness and mercy. This outweighs all that you might have earned or accumulated had you lived to an advanced age. 
    158. Whether you die or are slain, all of you will be mustered to Allah to be rewarded for your striving and sincerity.
    159. Allah of His mercy made your heart, Muhammad, ever tender in the treatment of the calamity that your people brought upon themselves. He made you speak to them in the gentle voice of peace. Had you been unsparing in censure and reproof and harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from you.  Therefore, give up resentment against them and invoke Allah’s mercy on their behalf. Consult with them upon matters of great moment, matters on which you received no divine authoritative instructions. So when you have reconciled their discord and resolved on a course of action, then trust in Allah, for Allah likes those who put their trust in Him.
    160. If Allah upholds you (Muslims) and confers on you His protection, as happened on the day of Badr, no one can gain advantage over you. And if He should deny you protection, as happened on the day of Uhud, who else is there besides Him who can protect you or help you in distress and misfortune? In Allah should those who have submitted to Him put their trust.
    161. It is not true that any prophet would illegally take part of the booty (as rumored by the hypocrites) since this act contradicts prophethood. He who withholds from anyone what is his by right, will carry the insignia of fraud and misappropriation on the Day of Judgment when every self will be requited with what is commensurate with its deeds and they will not be done an injustice.
    162. He who obeyed Allah’s orders in quest of Allah’s satisfaction is not to be compared with the one who draws on himself Allah’s wrath due to evil deeds and who has been destined to the abode in Hell, which is an evil destiny!
    163. These two groups of people are not alike. They are divided according to grades of quality, disposition, and attributes as determined by Allah. Allah is All-Seeing. He sees all that they do, and they will be requited with what is commensurate with their deeds.
    164. Allah has been gracious to those who have believed and accompanied the Prophet. He raised in their midst a messenger who is related to them by kinship and by the qualities into which they all entered. He is a messenger who will recite to them His revelations, sanctify them, and teach them the Book—the Qur’an—and the Sunnah, although they were once lost in error and literally were in evident error.
    165. Have you raged and faltered and when you met with a calamity that does not compare with what you brought on your enemy, which was twice as severe, now you say “How did this defeat befall us while we are Muslims and Allah’s Messenger lives among us? What was it due to?” Say to them, Muhammad, “You brought it on yourselves for your wrongful action. Allah, indeed, has power over all things, and He has requited you with what is commensurate with your deeds.
    166. What befell you that day when your forces and the disbelievers’ forces met in Uhud was justly brought about by Allah’s permission to distinguish those who believed in Allah.
    167. He exposes the hypocrites who pretended to be other then they are. When they left the battlefield on the day of Uhud, they were asked to join the Muslim forces to fight in the cause of Allah or at least to repel the enemy, but they made excuses. They said, “We would gladly follow you if we knew that you will actually fight.” They were then furthermost from Allah and their words did not accord with their inmost thoughts. Allah knows best their secret feelings.
    168. They were those who stayed at home who had something to say in defense and extenuation of their conduct. They made unfavorable comments about their fellow Muslims who were slain in battle: “Had they obeyed us and remained here, they would have been saved as we have been saved.” Say to them, Muhammad, “If this be the case, then avert death and prevent it from befalling you if indeed you are declaring the truth.”
    169. Do not consider the martyrs in the cause of Allah dead, for they are living in Heaven’s realm in the venerable and august presence of Allah their Lord, and they have divine provision.
    170. They rejoice exceedingly at Allah’s bounty and for those who are yet to join them, for they will have no grounds for fear or grief.
    171. They have assumed a state of favor and bounty conferred on them by Allah, that is, martyrdom. It is an assurance that Allah does not withhold nor withdraw the grateful return due to those who have believed—
    172. Who responded favorably to Allah and to His Prophet and resumed fighting after they had stopped after the calamity of Uhud. It was those who excelled at the battle and revered Allah and His Prophet. They will be requited with what is generously commensurate with their deeds.
    173. The news simply confirmed their faith in Allah and His victory, when the people told them that their enemies had mustered a great number of troops to fight against them so they should be fearful of them. It was those who did not fear fate; they feared nothing but Allah and said, “Allah is the answer to our purpose, our hopes and our needs, and how excellent He is for a Trustee.”
    174. The believers set out for the battle with greater determination, which the enemy sensed and consequently they fled from the rage of those whom they considered persecutors. Then the Muslims returned, by the grace of Allah and His bounty, unharmed. They espoused the cause of Allah and His satisfaction and were consequently qualified to receive His blessings. And Allah’s bounty is plentiful.
    
    175. Allah clarifies to the believers that it was only Satan, who inspired terror in the hearts and minds of those who were submissive to them, who in turn tried to transmit it to some of you. Therefore, do not fear them but fear Allah alone if indeed you are true believers.
    176. Let not those who hasten heedlessly to disbelieve grieve you, Muhammad. They will not harm Allah in the least. Allah is The All-Mighty. He has intended to allot to them no share of the bliss hereafter, and, moreover, there awaits them a tremendous torment.
    177. Those who exchanged faith for disbelief and who sought disbelief and abandoned faith will never harm Allah in the least. And their awaits them the torment that will be laid on the damned.
    178. The disbelievers must not think that the respite, the long lives, and the comfort that We grant them in this life are for their own good. This  simply gives them plenty of rope to allow them free action in order that they commit themselves further to the evil line of conduct. There awaits them a condign and humiliating torment.
    179. It was never in Allah’s will to let you believers remain in this present state that is a combination of faith and hypocrisy, but only to distinguish between the bad from the good by trials and commitments, to expose the malevolent and distinguish the benevolent. And Allah did not intend to endow you people with the prerogative of divination nor with power of knowing the unknown or realizing the unseen or the invisible. Yet He chooses from His prophets whom He wills and gives them knowledge of events to come according to His will. Therefore, believe in Allah and believe in His prophets, for if you believe and revere Him as He deserves, you will be requited with a great reward.
    180. Those who are unwilling to spend of what Allah has conferred on them in divine service should not consider this tight-fisted disposition an advantage to them. To the contrary, it is an injury to their interest and prejudice to their credit. They will be fitted round their necks on the Day of Judgment with what they hoarded. To Allah will be the inheritance of the realms of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is All-Knowing of all that you do and will requite you accordingly.
    181. Despite the fact that to Allah belong the earth and the heavens, some said that He is poor and that He asks us to give Him loans through spending; whereas we are rich and spend as we like. Allah has heard their speech and recorded it as well as their unjustified slaying of the prophets. And He will say to them at the predetermined moment, “Now taste the torment of burning in the Fire.
    182. “This is the evil that your wrongful hands have drawn after them.” Allah is not unjust to His servants
    183. Who said, “Allah has enjoined us not to believe in a prophet until he has presented to us an offering, which must be devoured by a fire from Heaven.” Say to them, Muhammad, “Many prophets before me presented you with clear evidence of Allah’s omnipotence and of their delegated divine authority and with such divinely miraculous acts as you have described. Why then did you kill them if indeed you are declaring the truth?”
    184. If they disbelieve you, they have already refused to believe the messengers sent before you who were sent to them with clear and plain revelations and signs that prove the truthfulness of their message. 
    185. Every self is certainly destined to the encounter with death, and if you encounter pains in this life, you will be requited on the Day of Judgment only with what is due to you. He who is diverted from the path leading to Hell to the path leading to Paradise will have triumphed. Life here below is but an animate existence affording pleasure and delusion.
    186. Be sure that you believers will be afflicted with some disagreeable events and misfortunes. You will experience loss in wealth through loss or spending in the cause of Allah, and in lives through jihad and illness, and you will hear contemptuous insults from the Jews, the Christians, and the polytheists. If you are patient and forbearing and revere Allah, you will have then considered matters with true resolve.
    187. Remember, Prophet, that once Allah made a covenant with the People of the Book that they should make the Book genuinely known to everyone and not hide the least part of its text and its precepts. However, they cast it behind their backs and exchanged the truth for the worthless vanity of the fleeting and ephemeral world. How evil and how ill indeed is the advantage they gained!
    188. Do not think, Muhammad, that those who rejoice at their successful perversion and love to be credited with theological virtues that they do not possess will escape torment! They bar themselves from the faith and the truth. They will, in fact, be put to the torment.
    189. To Allah belongs the absolute sovereignty of the  heavens and the earth. Allah has power over all things. He rewards the good doers and punishes the evil doers.
    190. Indeed, the creation of the heavens and the earth, with all their subtlety and fineness, and the variation in duration and the constant alternation of the night and the day are signs of Allah’s omnipotence and authority that are sensed by those who reflect.
    191. Those who reflect think of Allah with reverent feeling, standing, sitting, and lying on their sides, and they meditate on the infinite creation of the heavens and the earth and the wonders they exhibit. They pray, “O Allah our Lord, You did not bring all this into being but for an effect which you have predestined. Glory be to You and extolled are Your glorious attributes. Certainly, it reveals Your omnipotence and shows Your infinite wisdom. We beseech You to ensure us immunity from the torment of the Fire.
    192. “O Allah our Lord, our Provider and Preserver, indeed, he whom You destine to the abode in the Fire of Hell, You will have vested with the insignia of shame, and no help will be given to the wrongful.
    193. “We heard, O Allah our Lord, our Provider and Preserver, we heard Your prophet calling us to believe in You, and we responded favorably by adopting Your system of faith and worship. O Allah our Lord, we pray and beseech You to forgive our iniquities and to remit Our evil deeds and to take us to join those of the righteous.
    194. “O Allah our Lord, our Provider and Preserver, we pray and beseech You, O Allah, to bestow on us what You promised us at the hands of Your prophets, to grant us support and victory in this life, and not put us to shame on the Day of Resurrection. You certainly never fail to fulfill a promise.”
    195. There did Allah respond favorably to their invocation and answer their prayer. He said, “Indeed I do not annul, or withhold, the deeds of anyone of you, man or woman. They spring one from the other. Therefore, those who emigrated seeking Allah’s satisfaction and were ousted from their homes and suffered in My cause and fought the war of belief against disbelief and have survived or been slain will be entitled to a great reward. I will remit their evil deeds, I will welcome them in Gardens of bliss and unsurpassed beauty beneath which rivers flow, a highly appreciated reward from Allah, and in Allah’s grace rest hope and mercy and the best requital.”
    196. Let not the instances of prosperity falling to the disbelievers by the labor of trading from one place to another deceive you, Muhammad.
    197. It is nothing but prosperity of short duration, and then punishment must follow conviction. They are destined to the abode in Hell, and evil indeed is that abode.
    198. Whereas those who revered Allah will be welcomed in Gardens of bliss beneath which rivers flow in a perpetual ecstatic delight that characterizes the abode prepared for them by Allah. Whatever Allah has in His Heaven’s realm is better reward—which merits expectant waiting by those who conform their life and conduct to Islam—than that which the disbelievers entertain in this life.
    199. Certainly, among the People of the Book are those who believe in Allah and believe in all that has been revealed to Muhammad and to the other prophets before him. They humble themselves to Allah and never exchange the truth and the established divine principles for the worthless vanity of the fleeting world. Allah will reward such people with what is generously commensurate with their deeds of piety. Allah is swift indeed at the reckoning.
    200. O you who believe, endure and be patient. Outdo all others in exercising patience in the face of difficulties, and protect your borders, and revere Allah as He deserves so that you may prosper.
