SURAH 4
AN-NISA 
The Women
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed over a period of months shortly after the Battle of Uhud, in which many of the Muslims were killed primarily due to disobedience and lack of discipline. The event caused great concern with regard to orphans, widows, and captives of war. The surah declares some rights of women that they were denied under paganism. The surah, for the first time in the history of religions, deals with the law of limiting polygamy. The Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) permitted multiple wives, and the rule was not abrogated in the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]). The Church permitted polygamy in medieval times, but Islam limited polygamy to four wives and permitted it under certain conditions. The surah also deals with the hypocrites who were supporters of the enemies of Islam, and at this stage Islam began to acquire its own characteristics and be purified of paganism. The surah considers some basic principles to guide mankind in general and Muslims in particular: elegance, manners, equity and justice as applied to family life, care of orphans, marriage, divorce, and trusts. The surah insists on reconciliation [between spouses when there are marital problems], if feasible, and considers it consistent with piety. Allah proclaims in this surah His mandates of inheritance of property. It also defines those women who are forbidden in marriage (due to close relationship). Other subjects that this surah deals with include the act of worship in war time, the irreverence displayed by some People of the Book, those whom Allah will forgive, and those whom He will not forgive. Above all, He will never forgive the impiety of associating other deities with Him, but He forgives all else to whom He wills.  

    1. O people, revere Allah your Lord as He deserves. He brought you into being from one single self, and from it He created its mate, and from joining both in matrimony He propagated multitudes of men and women. So all of you belong to that one self. And revere Allah Whom you invoke for aid and protection and to Whom you appeal in witness that a statement or the like is true. And revere the wombs and never abandon them, whether they are close to you or far from you. Allah is All-Watcher. He always keeps a vigilant eye upon you, and He will requite you according to your deeds.
    2. And give to the orphans their property and do not exchange the worthless which you might own for the good and valuable which they own, nor incorporate their property with your property. This has always been regarded by Allah as a great sin.
    3. If you fear that you will be unjust to the orphans—as injustice to them is regarded a great sin—so you should have the same feeling if you are not just among your wives. And never have more than four; you may join in wedlock with as many as two, three, or four of other women of your choice, if you are sure that you can achieve justice among them. But if you fear that you will not be able to be just among this many, then do not marry more than one; or, under the circumstances, you may take the captives on hand into intimate relation of marriage. This prudent course of action is less likely to make you depart from moral righteousness and to have children whom you cannot supply with the necessities of life.
    4. And give the women whom you wed their dower with good will. But if the women willingly remit a part of it of their own accord, then you may take it and enjoy it. May it give you pleasure; may it do you good!
    5. And do not hand over the property to those who are foolish; this property is, in fact, the trust of the community but held in trust by a particular individual. If they are incapable, then exempt them from this responsibility, but gently and with kindness. And the property will serve as the source from which you sustain them and clothe them. And speak to them kindly and justly.
    6. And test the orphans now and then until they reach maturity and are fit for marriage. If you feel they have good sense and prudence, then hand over to them their property. And you must not abuse it or absorb it or devour it before they come of age. And he who is entrusted with the property must not impose a liability or charge a fee for the execution of his functions; but he should be virtuous if he is wealthy. But if he is poor, then he may remunerate himself with equity. And when you hand over the property to the orphans, have others witness the transfer. And Allah is All-sufficient in taking account.
    7. Men have a rightful claim to the property left by parents and kindred, and women have the same rightful claim to the property left by parents and kindred. It is a clearly defined portion allotted to them by Providence, be it little or much.
    8. And if the poor relatives, the orphans, and the needy who are not entitled to have a portion of the inheritance are present when the inheritance is divided and distributed among the heirs, then provide them with some portion of it as a gesture to avoid a disappointment of their expectation and the envy they feel at the superior advantages of others. And speak kindly and justly with them.
    9. And let people not take unjust action against the orphans, and let them be disposed to be pious to Allah, and to propose what is right as they would like others to do with their heirs on whose account will they be deeply concerned should they be left young and helpless. And let them say the truth that does not entail wrongful action against anybody. 
    10. Indeed those who wrongfully eat the orphans out of their property simply consume but fire into their bellies, and they will suffer the fire on the Day of Judgment.
    11. Allah commands you regarding your children’s inheritance, in case you die, that which achieves justice and reformation thus:
    a) The male will inherit the equivalent of what is apportioned to two females in case the heirs are males and females.
    b) If the heirs are females and their number exceeds two, then they equally share two-thirds of what the deceased has left. It is implicitly concluded from the verse that if they were only two, they would have the same portion, that is, two-thirds.
    c) And if one daughter is the only heir, then she has a rightful claim to one-half.
    d) If the deceased has left a child, male or female, and his parents, then each of the parents will have a rightful claim to one-sixth.
    e) But if the deceased has left no child and his immediate heirs are the parents, then one-third goes to the mother, and the rest to the father.
    f) Unless he has also brothers and/or sisters; then the mother inherits only one-sixth, and the rest goes to the father.
    These proceedings are concluded after any legacy he might have bequeathed and any due debts have been paid. Commit all your causes to Allah, Who knows what is best; whereas you do not know which of your parents and your children is best to you. This is an ordinance (authoritative direction) decreed by Allah. Indeed Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    12. a) The husband has a rightful claim to one-half of what his wife has left if she has no child from him or from anyone else.
    b) But if she has a child, then her husband is entitled to only one- quarter of what she has left after any legacy she might have bequeathed and any due debts have been paid.
    c) And the wives—one or more—will have a rightful claim to one- quarter of what their husbands have left in the event he has no child from her or from any other wife.
    d) If he has a child, then one-eighth only of what he has left goes to the wives—one or more— after any legacy he might have bequeathed and any due debts have been paid. 
    (All the aforementioned rules regarding the son also apply to the grandson).
    e) And if the deceased, a man or a woman, has no immediate heirs but only a maternal brother and/or sister, then each of them will have a rightful claim to one-sixth.
    f) But if the maternal brothers and/or sisters are more than two, then they have shares in one-third, man and woman alike, after the payment of any due debt, or a legacy that does not exceed one-third of what the deceased has left. So, believers, commit yourselves to Allah’s command. Allah is All-Knowing of those who are fair or unfair among you, and He is All-Wise, Who does not immediately punish the wrongdoers.
    13. These rules of the system of inheritance are the limits defined by Allah to His servants to follow them and never go beyond them. Those who obey Allah and His Messenger will receive Allah’s blessings; Allah will welcome them into Gardens of eternal bliss beneath which rivers flow, and this is, indeed, a triumph supreme.
    14. And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger and goes beyond the limits prescribed by Allah will be charged with his transgression. Allah will admit him to Hell, wherein he will last forever, suffering a humiliating torment.
    15. And those of your women who commit themselves to acts of sexual immorality will be punished on the testimony of four witnesses of your men (coreligionists) who are known to be just. Should these men attest to the truth of the act, then confine them (the women) indoors to protect them and deter evil until death claims them or until Allah ordains for them a special providence (construed to mean repentance and marriage).
    16. And if any two of you, unmarried man and woman, commit themselves to the same evil line of conduct, punish them both with a defined punishment if their conduct was proven by the witness of four pious men. But if they repent and abandon wrongdoing, then disregard their past act and do not reproach them to induce mental pain. Allah always accepts true repentance and atonement made by the people; He is always Ever-Relenting, Ever-Merciful.
    17. Allah takes upon Himself to accept the repentance of those who commit themselves to an evil line of conduct proceeding from undue haste and want of thought and soon thereafter wake up before death. Allah will give up resentment against such persons and pardon their offense. Allah is always All-Knowing, Who recognizes sincere repentance, and All-Wise (Who never fails in judgment).
    18. But in no case will Allah take upon Himself to accept the repentance of those who consume their life in wrongdoing until they encounter death and then say, “Now do I repent.” Nor of those who are caught in the jaws of death while they are disbelievers. Such persons will be denied Allah’s forgiveness, and He has prepared for them a painful torment.
    19. O you who believe, you are not entitled to treat women as property to be inherited against their will following the death of their husbands. You are forbidden to ill treat them to force them to give up a part of the dower or of the property you have given them, unless they have been proven guilty of an evil line of conduct. And you must live with them in equity and honor. And should you take to them so much dislike (due to ill manners or lack of beauty), it may happen that you dislike something whereby Allah makes all grace abound.
    20. And if any of you decides to substitute one wife for another, and you had dowered your divorcee when you married with a talent of gold, you shall not recover the least part of it. Would you reclaim by fraud and dishonesty what is their right, and you stand in manifest deceit and falsehood? 
    21. And how could you reclaim it when you have already entered into matrimony and communion with one another and your vows and solemn promise of allegiance and good will have been pledged to them before Allah?
    22. And do not marry the women whom your fathers (deceased or divorced) have married before, as this incestuous union is regarded by Allah and the people as an immoral act, a degrading vice, and an evil line of conduct. Allah will overlook what happened in the past. 
    23. Forbidden to you to marry are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your paternal and maternal aunts, your nieces on the brother and sister’s side, your foster mothers, your foster sisters, your mothersinlaw, your stepdaughters with whose mothers you have consummated marriage, your daughtersinlaw whose husbands are your own sons from your own loins. Nor may you marry two sisters at the same time, except for what has already passed. Indeed, Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    24. Nor may you marry the women who are married (be they free or slaves) except the captives on hand whom you captured in war between you and the disbelievers, as their previous marriages are nullified by captivity and they become allowed to you after you have made sure that they are not pregnant; Allah ordains that you observe this rule. But lawful to you are all who are beyond these limits, with the proviso that you seek to win, with your resources, the women of your choice in wedlock, other than in fornication. And pay those of them whom you will enjoy their dowers; it is a duty incurred by such bond. Nonetheless there is no consequence if you mutually agree to give her more than what you have dutifully paid or you take back from her what she wishes to remit of her own accord. Indeed, Allah is All-Knowing of His servants’ affairs and All-Wise in settling for them that which is good for them.
    25. And those of you who do not have enough resources to marry in wedlock the Muslim women who enjoy civil liberty, may resort to the young unmarried Muslim women among those reduced to a servile state (slavery). And Allah knows best those of you whose faith shapes their character and will. Take them in marriage, without feeling the least shame, as you are alike in faith, by permission of their guardians and pay to them (your wives) their dowers with good will. And choose those of them who are characterized with chastity, faith, fidelity, and honesty. And when once they are united in wedlock, they have to guard themselves from temptation. And if they commit themselves to an evil line of conduct [adultery], then they will suffer for their offense, but their punishment will be half that inflicted on free women for the same offense. This is ordained for those who are afraid to live in celibacy lest they should commit themselves to an evil line of conduct and incur the undesirable consequence. And if you be patient, it is better for you, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful. 
    26. Allah intends to indicate to you the best course of action and to guide you to divine providence and to the habits of life acquired by those who came to this world before you, and to give up resentment against you and to pardon your offense. And Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    27. But whereas Allah takes upon Himself to extend His mercy to you and give up resentment against you and pardon your offense, the wicked who follow their lusts wish to alienate you from Allah’s purpose and see you depart far from the path of righteousness.
    28. Allah means to unburden you from the sins and sorrows of life. Man was created lacking in moral strength, endurance, and resistance; hence, the easy duties that Allah ordains for him suit him more.
    29. O you who believe, do not eat your property out of each other in irreverence, unless it be a trade or exchange of commodities for a profit consented to by both the buyer and the seller. Nor will you endanger yourselves by disobeying Allah’s commands; nor will any of you kill his Muslim brother. Allah is All-Merciful to you.
    30. And he who sinfully and wrongfully commits himself to such line of action will suffer grievously. We will subject him to a dreadful Fire, and this is easy for Allah to do.
    31. If you avoid and refrain from committing the major sins that have been forbidden to you, We will remit your iniquities—so long as you strive to be pious—and admit you into favor and grant you an honorable entry into the realm of bliss.
    32. Neither men nor women should long for the superior advantages or privileges Allah has given to some of you over others. Each of you has a rightful claim to be apportioned, the proper share of what they have earned (by labor or inheritance). Therefore, each of you should long for the bounty of Providence and show that you have fulfilled the requirements for deserving what you prayed for. Allah is ever All-Knowing of everything and gives each what is best for him or her.
    33. To all We have determined successors lawfully entitled to inherit what they have left—that is, the parents, the kindred, and those to whom the deceased has given an apportioned share of the inheritance in lieu of supporting him if he needed support. Therefore, give to each party what he or she is entitled to get, and keep in mind that Allah is Witness to all things and knows what you do.
    34. Men are the guardians of women’s interests and welfare by consequence of the inherent constitutional qualities and attributes Allah has invested in some over some others, and by virtue of what they strive to earn to spend on their families. Virtuous women are obedient to Allah and to their husbands, and they are capable of fulfilling an obligation and trust in their husbands’ absence.   As to those of them who you consider persistent and you have a cause to fear, simply exhort them and urge them by kind words to laudable conduct. Then absent yourselves from their society in bed, then slightly beat them without causing any injuries or humiliation to them. But if they submit to your good will at any stage and surrender themselves to correction, then do not transgress by seeking a higher stage of punishment. Allah is ever The Unique Whose attributes belong to the highest regions of thought and reality, and He will punish you if you harm them or do an injustice against them.
    35. And if you suspect a breaking of the union between them or impending ruptured relations, then you may choose an arbitrator from the husband’s side and an arbitrator from the wife’s side, in order to obtain an equitable decision. Should the arbitrators both be willing to reconcile the differences and quarrels, then Allah will reconcile them (the couple) and make sympathy of love unite their thoughts. Allah is All-Knowing, well acquainted with all that you are doing.
    36. And worship Allah alone and do not associate anything with Him, and commit your parents to your kind care and display a friendly and kind disposition to them and to the kindred who are related by blood, to the orphans, and to those who have been impoverished by disability or disaster. A similar disposition is extended to the neighbor, whether related to you or not, to the companion, to the wayfarer, and to male and female slaves. And realize that Allah detests every boastful one who exalts himself unduly and is arrogant—
    37. Those boastful who are also miserly, unwilling to give in benevolence, who induce others to be mean and parsimonious, and who hide Allah’s grace that He has bestowed, hence refraining from doing good to themselves or to others. We have prepared for disbelievers a humiliating torment.
    38. Allah does not favor those who spend of their wealth ostentatiously under the guise of benevolence while, in fact, they believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day, as they have bound themselves to the footsteps of Satan. And he who associates himself with the devil has, in fact, espoused evil, and evil indeed is the companion.
    39. What would the disbelievers lose if they believe in Allah and the Last Day and spend with good intention and hope of reward of what Allah has bestowed on them? Indeed, Allah is ever aware of them, All-Knowing of all that they do, be it in secret or in public.
    40. Allah is never unjust to anyone in the least. He does not scale down his good deeds or increase his punishment. He mercifully requites the pious deed with double what is commensurable with it, and He requites those who are faithful to Him with a great reward.
    41. How will it be for those miserly who refrain from Allah’s commands if and when We call upon the Messenger of every nation to bear witness to his people’s deeds, and We call upon you, Muhammad, to bear witness to your people.
    42. There and then those who disbelieved in Allah or His statutes or both and who disobeyed the Messenger will wish they could be leveled to the dust like the dead. And not one fact can they hide from Allah, Who reveals all their states and deeds.
    43. O you who are believers, do not engage in the act of worship while you are under the influence of intoxicants until you recognize what you say, nor enter into a mosque when you are in a state of major ritual impurity—unless you are on the road—until you have bathed. And if you are sick and water would increase your sickness; or you are on the road and obtaining water is difficult for you; or you have defecated or have come in contact with women and the sensation or contact stirred you to passion and you did not find water for ablution; then dry ablution (tayammum) is a religious rite: apply clean sand, dust, or dry earth lightly to your faces and hands. Allah is Ever-Indulgent, Oft-Forgiving. 
    44. Have you, Muhammad, not seen into the irreverent disposition of those who had their share of the Book and of divine knowledge, how they exchange the guidance of Providence to the path of righteousness for the perplexed path of error, and how they wish to alienate you from the path of Allah and err and stray from the way of righteousness!
    45. Allah knows best those who are at enmity with you, who seek to injure you and afflict you, if they could, with a disaster. But Allah is enough to be your Guardian and enough to help you, so never seek help from any but Him.
    46. Among the Jews are some who alter the intended sense of Allah’s words. And they say to you, Muhammad, “We have heard your words but we disobey.” And they say to you, “We need you to apply your ears to us, and you are excused if you do not listen, but please attend to us.” In fact, the way they pronounce the words gives them a secondary bad meaning and insults the religion, thus: “Listen, may you never hear and be afflicted with deafness, you are a thoughtless bad one.”
    (And they say “attend to us” in a way that shows that they want the Prophet to give them some attention; whereas they insult him and describe him as hasty and irrational.) 
    But had they said “we open to you our hearts’ ears and we obey” instead of saying “we have heard your words but we disobey” and said “please listen to us” without saying “may you never hear” and “direct your eye to us,” it would have been much better for them and indeed honorable. But Allah has expelled them from His mercy for their disobedience and their disbelief. They do not believe in Allah’s call but a few of them.
    47. O you to whom the Book has been given, believe in the Qur’an, which We have revealed to Our Messenger Muhammad, corroborating and authoritatively validating the authentic Book, the Tawrah, which you possess, before We efface faces and wipe out their features beyond recognition and eclipse their splendor. Or before We afflict you with such evils as indicate divine wrath and a malignant fate, just as We cursed those who broke the Sabbath. Allah’s command always comes to pass.
    48. Allah will never forgive the impious irreverence of associating other deities with Him, but He forgives all else to whom He will. And he who associates other deities with Allah will have committed the most heinous unforgivable sin.
    49. Do not wonder, Muhammad, into the manner of those who vindicate themselves and justify their wrongs! Although We have shown them how bad their deeds are, they see them as good and praise themselves for committing them. Indeed, it is only Allah Who has the absolute authority to distinguish the bad from the good, and no one is ever wronged not even to the equivalent of a single date-plaiting.
    50. Look how they forge lies against Allah, and that is enough to be manifest sin.
    51. Have you not seen, Muhammad, the irreverent disposition of those who had their share of the Book and of divine knowledge—the People of the Book—how they are strongly disposed to believe in falsehood, rendering idolatrous worship to idols, priests, necromancers, and to the devil, and how they admire the disbelievers and consider them the guideposts of faith compared to those who took Providence as their guide!
    52. These are they whom Allah has cursed and expelled from His mercy as indications of divine wrath and a malignant fate. He whom Allah has cursed will find no one to help him and protect him from Allah’s wrath.
    53. They have been deprived from the bounty of entertaining power. But if they did, they would never have bestowed on mankind even as little as the speck in a date stone.
    54. Why do they envy the Arabs for what Allah has endowed upon them, sending a Prophet from among them, despite that Allah has bestowed on Ibrahim (Abraham)—your father and their father—and his family the divine prerogative of prophethood and the Book and the wisdom that go with it, and He privileged them with sovereignty and a great kingdom.
    55. And among those to whom Ibrahim was sent, were some who recognized him and believed in him and others who declined to accept him. And enough is Hell to lay claim to those disbelievers to infuriate its blazes.
    56. Those who deny Our clear revelations and refuse to recognize Our Prophets will be put to torture. We will expose them to the protracted and dreadful conflagration. As often as their skins are consumed, We will replace them with new skins so that they taste the merciless but just punishment. Indeed, Allah is All-Powerful and All-Wise. 
    57. But those who believed and behaved with wisdom and piety will be recipients of Allah’s mercy and. blessings. We will welcome them into Gardens beneath which rivers flow wherein they will have passed to eternity. They will be companioned with mates of their design, pure, chaste, and holy, fellows of their piety, and will be overshadowed with Allah’s gracious favors.
    58. Allah commands you believers to restore the property and whatever you hold in trust—be it from Allah or from people—to those who have the rightful claim to it and or to those who have entrusted you with it, and to exercise justice. This is Allah’s admonition to you; stick to it. How morally excellent is what He exhorts you to do. Allah is All-Hearing and All-Seeing.
    59. O you who believe in the revelation that Muhammad has received, obey Allah and obey the Messenger and obey those among you who are in authority. Nonetheless, if you seem resolved to dispute any subject or any concern, then resort to Allah and the Messenger, in case you believe in Allah and the . This is the right resolution to your disputes. This is a wise course of action ensuring safety and leading to the intended purpose.
    60. Have you seen, Muhammad, the irreverent disposition of those who allege that they believe in all that has been revealed to you and to all that was revealed to Messengers before you—how they wish to resort to the devil and to false deities for judgment of their disputes! Yet Allah has commanded them to reject and renounce every deity besides Allah. But Satan intends to mislead them into the maze of error.
    61. When the hypocrites are advised to resort to the Law sent by Allah to be the standard for judgment and to go to you (the Messenger) for aid, you see them turn away their faces in repugnance, turn their eyes and their thoughts from you.
    62. And so, how will it be if and when a misfortune or a calamity befalls them in consequence of what their wrongful hands have committed, while they have no one to resort to but you! There and then they will go to you solemnly swearing by Allah that they meant nothing but peace upon earth and concord and good will among men.
    63. Allah is All-Knowing of the irreverence in the hearts of these and such persons who appeal to Allah that they meant nothing but good deeds and good will. Therefore, disregard what they say, Muhammad, and exhort them with words that reach their ears and their hearts.
    64. Never did We send a Messenger but to be obeyed, Allah willing, and he who exercises hypocrisy or lies or opposes the Messenger is unjust to himself. And if they had turned to Allah as soon as they wronged themselves and gone to you to invoke Allah’s forgiveness, and you, Muhammad, had invoked Allah, on their behalf, for mercy and forgiveness, they would have found Allah All-Forgiving and All-Merciful to His servants.
    65. But never, by Allah your Lord, will they be recognized as believers until they have willingly accepted you as the judge or the arbitrator and accepted your judgment and submitted reverently to your authority.
    66. And if We had enjoined them to engage in the ultimate strife of incessant fighting, or sacrifice their lives, or to go out of their homes to fight against positive disbelief, they would not have obeyed the injunction, with the exception of a few. Allah enjoins them only to what they can bear. If they had obeyed Allah’s authoritative admonition, it would have been much better for them here and hereafter. Such obedience would have confirmed their belief and position of authority.
    67. There and then they would have merited a great reward from Heaven.
    68. And moral straightness and the path of righteousness would have been all before them, and Providence would have been their guide.
    69. He who obeys Allah and His Messenger by submitting to their commands and judgment will be placed in the distinguished position of those in whom all divine grace abounds: the Prophets, the veracious, the martyrs, and the pious in a perverse world; and how celebrated is the society.
    70. Such a distinguished position assigned to whoever obeyed Allah and His Messenger is a manifestation of Allah’s grace, and enough for any believer is Allah to be All-Knowing of his state while he obeys Him and seeks His favor.
    71. O you who believe, take all precautions to provide against a surprise attack and be always ready to repel them, and advance in single battalions or advance in regiment.
    72. And beware of the disheartening and discouraging individuals among you who detach themselves from you (when you go to fight) in thought and action so that if you happen to suffer loss or a calamity, any one of them would say, “Allah has been gracious to me, for I was guided to detach myself from the pursuit of their fight.”
    73. But should you gain victory and you gather the booty, he says, “I wish I were a part of them, I would have achieved a great victory and gathered some booty,” as if he is not bound to you by ties of affection.
    74. Since the like of these aforementioned whose faith in Allah is greatly shaken are among you, O Muslims, then let those of you who have the world all before them but choose to exchange it for the better world in Heaven’s realm hereafter, fight in the cause of Allah. And he who fights in the cause of Allah, whether he loses his life or is victorious, will merit Our blessings and We will repay him an imposingly beautiful reward.
    75. And why should you not fight in the cause of Allah when the helpless and the oppressed among the men, the women, and the children appeal to Allah for aid: “We pray and beseech You, O Allah our Lord, to deliver us out of the sovereignty of the unjust who are tyrannous and oppressive, and confer on us Your patronage and Your victory.”
    76. Those who believe in the truth fight in the cause of Allah; whereas those who disbelieve in Allah fight in the cause of injustice and corruption and became advocates of the devil. Therefore, fight them, O Muslims, because they are the advocates of the irreverent system of worship instituted by Satan, and be sure that you will win victory over them by Allah’s support. Indeed, the cunning of Satan is taken to be weak.
    77. Have you not seen, Muhammad, the disposition of those who were told to restrain their desire for fighting and to faithfully observe the prayer and give zakah (poor-dues). Yet when Allah enjoined them to fight, some of them feared the enemy—to a degree comparable to or even higher than the degree of fear that is due to Allah, Lord of all beings. And they exclaimed against fighting, saying, “O Allah our Lord, why enjoin us to fight?” Thinking that fighting would soon end their lives, they said, “If only You would put fighting in respite and postpone this obligation to a future date in order that we may enjoy our lives!” Say to them, Muhammad, “Go ahead to fighting even if it leads to death. The enjoyment experienced here below, no matter how long it lasts, is fleeting and evanescent compared with the enjoyments and everlasting bliss of the Hereafter. The Hereafter abounds in the best for those who revere Allah as He deserves. And you all will be requited according to your deeds, and no one will ever be wronged, not even to a single date-plaiting.”
    78. Wherever you may be, you will be caught by death even if you happen to be in fortified strongholds. Yet when good fortune falls in the way of those with shaken belief, they attribute it to Allah, and if misfortune comes to them, they attribute it to you, Muhammad. Say to them, “All happenings, good or bad, are authorized by Allah as a test.” What ails these people that they hardly comprehend a word?	
    79. In effect, whatever good fortune comes to you is endowed with grace from the bounty of Allah, and whatever misfortune befalls you is the consequence of your own doings. We have sent you, Muhammad, to human kind as a Messenger, and enough is Allah to be a Witness to all deeds.
    80. He who obeys the Messenger has, in effect, obeyed Allah, as the Messenger only enjoins that which Allah has enjoined and forbids only that which Allah has forbidden; so, he who obeys the Messenger has, in effect, obeyed Allah. And he who turns away must realize that We did not send you as a preserver over them.
    81. They whose faith is greatly shaken show obedience in your presence, Muhammad, and say to you, “We obey all that you exhort us to do.” But when they depart from you, some of them design by night a scheme of action not according with your commands, and Allah puts in writing all that they propose to do. Therefore, disregard them; and rely upon Allah, and enough is He to be your Guardian Who exercises protecting vigilance over you.
    82. Do those hypocrites not ponder the Qur’an to know Allah’s command, to obey Him and follow your orders, and to know that this Book is revealed by Him as shown by its coherence and integrity? If it were revealed from a source other than Allah, they would have found it abounding in discrepancies and variations.
    83. When these people learn, by credible or incredible sources, a subject or report or talk to the credit of the Muslims or against them, they spread it as news and circulate it as rumor to terrorize them or to inform their enemies against them. Had those hypocrites referred the matter of security and fear to the Messenger and, in his absence, to the leaders who are in authority among them and inquired about the reality from them, they would have known the facts from the Prophet and the leaders. Had it not been for Allah’s grace and mercy that enabled you to win and prosper, you people would have followed Satan except a few.
    84. Disregard those hypocrites who live among you, Muhammad, and fight in the cause of Allah and the truth. You are not responsible for anyone but yourself. But incite those who believe to make war against disbelief; perhaps Allah may curb the hostility of those disbelievers. Allah will support you and give you victory. Allah’s omnipotence infinitely exceeds man’s might, and when He avenges His right, He is more strict in torture. 
    85. Those hypocrites side with corruption; whereas believers side with the truth. He who sides with the good will have a share of his good grace allotted to him by Providence. And he who sides with the bad, for the purpose of an evil cause or for selfish motives will share the consequences of his ill deed. Allah is Supreme Overseer.
    86. When you are greeted with words or gestures, acknowledge the greeting with a more courteous recognition or at least return the same formula; it is an obligation. Allah takes account of all things and all actions.
    87. Allah—there is no god but Him, and none besides Him has the least authority—will inevitably revive you all after death for the Day of Resurrection, the Day which admits no suspicion. He says that, so never doubt what He says, and who is more truthful than Allah?
    88. How can you Muslims be divided regarding the hypocrites who show Islam and hide disbelief; are they Muslims or not? Are they capable of being guided to Islam or not? In effect, Allah has cast them back to disbelief. Do not wish to guide those whom Allah has declined to guide to His path of righteousness! He whom Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness will not be able to be guided by anyone.
    89. You wish to guide those hypocrites, but they wish you would desert faith in favor of disbelief as they do, so that you be both alike. Therefore, do not take patrons of them until they have emigrated as purposed by Allah and have resolved to fight in His cause. Should they turn a deaf ear and join your enemies, then beset them on all sides. And kill them wherever you find them and join none of them patrons nor lean upon any of them to help you.
    90. But exempt from aforesaid prescriptive right are those hypocrites who take refuge with or are related to a people with whom you are bound by a covenant relating to peace, truce, or alliance. Or also exempt are those hypocrites who are perplexed by reason of their kinship to your opponents; they do not have the heart to fight on your side against their people nor to side with their people against you. The first group is protected by the covenant, whereas the other is protected because they are perplexed.  Had Allah willed, He would have incited them against you, and then they would have waged war against you. Therefore, if they are disposed to let you alone, to proceed no further and offer you peace, then do not kill them, for there is no reason to do that.
    91. If you have victory, they apply for security from you; and if their people have victory, they apply for security from their people. Hence, they always exercise hypocrisy and turn to it. Then, unless they let you alone and proceed no further and offer you peace, kill them wherever you find them or whenever you gain mastery over them. Allah gives you a free hand against them and complete liberty of action.
    92. The above mentioned grouping of hypocrites is only made for precautious measures, so that no Muslim would be taken for a hypocrite and get killed. It is not right to kill a believer unless it be by unintentional mistake. In case a believer who lives in a Muslim state is killed by mistake, then diyah (blood-money) should be paid to the deceased’s family to compensate them for their loss, and a Muslim slave is to be released to make up for the loss inflicted on the Muslim community unless they donate it, since manumitting a Muslim slave is in effect reinstating him in the Muslim society. And if the victim is a Muslim whose people are your enemy, then there should be a freeing of a Muslim neck. If the victim is of a people with whom there is a binding peace agreement, then a Muslim slave should be released from bondage and the blood-money is to be paid to the deceased’s family. If the (accidental) killer does not have the means to fulfill the divine Law as indicated above, he will have to fast from dawn to sunset for two consecutive months. Allah is The All-Knowing Who knows the intentions. And He is The All-Wise Who sets the right penalty for the offense.
    93. And he who kills a believer intentionally will be destined to Hell, wherein he will have passed to eternal suffering, and he will have drawn Allah’s wrath and curse on himself. This is besides the torment prepared by Allah to lay upon the damned.
    94. In case of war, it is incumbent to take all possible measures not to kill a believer. So, when you journey into a foreign land in Allah’s cause, you must distinguish the disposition of the people whom you will fight—whether or not they have conformed to Islam. Nor should you say to anyone who greets you and shows you signs of peace “you are not a Muslim” in quest of money and booty, but accept their peaceful signs and greetings, as Allah Has prepared for you better and sublime booty. Remember, if he is not a believer in Allah, thus were you before, but Allah of His grace guided you to His path of righteousness. Therefore, discern the reality of the people you are about to fight. Allah is Ever-Knowing of all that you do and will requite you according to your deeds.
    95. Indeed, it is a sublime honor to exercise such a cautious jihad, as they are not alike, those who stay at home for no valid reason and those who strive in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives. Allah has graced those who strove with their wealth and their lives in His cause with special distinctions a step higher in the scale of dignity and rank than those who stayathome, unless they have valid reasons that prevent them from going out for jihad. Yet, although Allah will distinguish those who strive from the stayathome by quite a rich reward, Allah promised to both efficacious grace effecting the end for which it is given. 
    96. This grade assigned to those who strive in the cause of Allah is very high due to the great disparity between it and others. Yet Allah confers it on them, in addition to great forgiveness and vast mercy.
    97. The Muslims should depart from humiliation and move to the Muslim state, as they will be questioned by the angels, “What became of you, and what was your reaction to oppression and humiliation?” The answer will be, “We were oppressed by tyrannical exercise of power.” The angels ask, “Was Allah’s earth not extensive enough for you to move to another country and settle there?” Such persons are destined to Hell, and evil indeed is the intended end (as the Muslim should not accept humiliation, but he must live in dignity and honor).
    98. But exempt from this are the men who are weak to age, the women and the children who are weak in bodily or muscular strength who have no stratagem to use against the enemy or who are unable to lead any course of action or determine the course of events.
    99. Such persons may be excused, and there is hope that Allah may give up resentment against them; Allah has always been All-Tolerant and All-Forgiving.
    100. And he who emigrates in the cause of Allah to support the truth will find many places of refuge in which he humiliates the enemies of the truth, and abounding resources of freedom and dignity and multiple reward. And he who quits his homeland in the service of Allah’s purpose and His Messenger but happens to meet death, will win Allah’s grace; his reward has thus early been incumbent on Allah.
    101.Prayer is incumbent in all circumstances and cannot be dropped during a journey. Yet, you incur no guilt if you should shorten your prayer (reduce the number of rak`ahs) if you fear you might be exposed to a willfully inflicted injury by those who are an enemy of the faith. Therefore, be cautious; the disbelievers are indeed your avowed enemy.
    102. And if you, Muhammad, happen to be with the Muslims and it is time to observe a congregational prayer, then you should divide the Muslims into two groups so that you may keep on guard. Perform your act of worship as indicated here: You lead the prayer with the first group, who will remain carrying their weapons while the second group stand guard over you in the rear. When you have (prostrated) completed the first rak`ah, then the first group withdraws to the rear to replace those in the second group, who now join you during your second rak`ah, at the end of which you, Muhammad, will have completed your two rak`ahs. Now there remains one rak`ah for each group to perform. The first group (armed) now performs the second rak`ah with the second group standing guard over them in the rear. Then the groups reverse their position until each group has completed its two rak`ahs, being cautious at all times. The disbelievers wish you would neglect your arms and your equipment so that they attack you once for all. Yet you are absolved to lay down your arms if it rains or if you fall sick, but be constantly on your guard. Allah has prepared for the disbelievers a tormenting punishment, humiliating indeed. 
    103. When you have completed your prayer, keep remembering Allah and standing, sitting, and lying on your sides. However, when you feel safe and secure, then perform the act of worship in the proper manner as prescribed by Allah, for the act of worship is incumbent on those who believe to observe at the scheduled hours.
    104. And do not relax in strictness and severity nor weaken in your fighting power against those who are an open enemy of the faith. If you are suffering war injuries, they are suffering just the same; but you are unlike them, for they are staking their very lives on some dark hope, whereas you are hopeful of Allah’s guardianship, mercy, and blessings. And Allah is All-Knowing of your deeds and theirs, and He is The All-Wise Who requites everyone according to his deeds.
    105. We have sent down to you, Muhammad, the Book (the Qur’an) in truth and inclusive of all that is right to the Last Day, so that you judge between the people in the manner shown to you by Allah. And so, do not be deceived by the wicked who attempt to prejudice you and deceive you into using your authority to favor and vindicate those who are treacherous.
    106. And when judging between people, invoke Allah’s forgiveness and mercy and remember His grace. Allah is Ever Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    107. And you should not plead on behalf of those who deceive themselves and assert what is false and lead others into error. Allah detests the one who deceitfully violates faith and betrays trust.
    108. They hide their evil deeds from the notice of others, but how can they conceal them from the notice of Allah when He is with them (by His knowledge). They plot when they are alone at night and their dispositions go against the principles of Allah. But Allah is Ever-Cognizant of all that they do.
    109. If you people have pleaded on their behalf here below so that they may not be punished for their evil deeds, who is going to plead on their behalf on the Day they rise again and come to Allah’s final judgment? Or who will then take them under his guardianship?
    110. The door of repentance is open. He who commits himself to an evil line of conduct or wrongs himself and invokes Allah’s forgiveness and mercy will find Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    111. The consequences of sins are only inflicted on those who commit them. And he who commits himself to an evil line of conduct will have only committed it against himself and to the hurt of his own interest. Allah is All-Knowing of what he has done and requites him according to His wisdom.
    112. And he who makes a mistake or does something in a manner contrary to equity and uprightness or commits a crime and throws the blame on someone who is innocent (as someone who steals something then accuses an innocent one of stealing it) will have burdened himself with two sins: the guilt of intentional assertion of falsehood and of the crime.
    113. And had it not been for Allah’s efficacious grace and mercy abounding in you, Muhammad, some of those would have resolved to lead you in the wrong, when in fact they will only mislead themselves, as Allah has informed you with the truth, and your wisdom leads you to it. Even though they desire to harm you, they cannot get you into harm’s way. Allah has revealed to you the Book—the Qur’an—to guide you and acquaint your heart with wisdom, and He imparted to you the knowledge of what you never knew except from Him. And Allah’s grace and blessings on you have, indeed, been abounding.
    114. There is nothing useful nor reliable for a purpose or efficient in a function in much of their secret counsel and thoughts, as evil multiplies as long as it is hidden. Unless that secret talk be in accord with wisdom and piety, enjoining benevolence, equity, the inducement to peace among people, and the principles of justice. And he whose character features willingness to comply with divine principles for the sake of piety will be a recipient of Allah’s grace. We will requite him with a great reward in this world and in the Hereafter.
    115. And he who contends with the Messenger with opposing arguments after he has clearly sensed the spirit of truth guiding to all truth and who follows a path other than that followed by those who believe and who enters into loyalty with the enemies of the believers—he will be deemed as belonging to those enemies if he takes them as his masters. Allah will punish him in Hellfire. 
    116. Such a fatal end never fails such people who are the enemies of Islam. Like them are those who associate other deities with Allah, since every sin is forgivable except associating other deities with Allah or worshiping other deities besides Allah and opposing His Messenger. Never will Allah forgive the impious irreverence of associating other deities with Him, but He forgives all else to whom He will. And he who associates other deities with Allah will have lost himself in the maze of error.
    117. The most obvious manifestation of association of other deities with Allah is that they worship that which neither hears nor sees, harms nor benefits. They simply revere and venerate idols designated by female appellations—goddesses like Lat, 'Uzza, Manat and others—and invoke them besides Allah. It is a visible manifestation of Satan.
     118. Allah has cursed him and afflicted him with such evils as indicate divine wrath and a malignant fate. His insolence was such as to promise Allah to incite a determinate number of His servants to evil.
    119. He vowed that he would lead them into error and would lead them to an evil line of conduct and arouse in them vain desires and stir up their sinful, sensuous appetite. Thus he puts them under his control and pushes them to do unreasonable things that they consider as worship; whereas they are nothing but false illusions. So, he incited them to cut the ears of cattle and to change the course and order of things wherein they were set at the creation, and made them believe that the cattle whose ears were cut should not be slaughtered, worked, or prevented from any grazing ground according to his orders, and convinced them that this is a religion. And thus they follow him and take him as a refuge besides Allah. And he who puts himself under the guardianship of Satan besides Allah will be a great loser and deserves punishment in this life and in the Hereafter.
    120. He stirs them to do evil, promises them, and arouses in them vain desires when, in fact, he promises them only what is vain, deceptive, and deluding.
    121. Such persons who abandoned their mental faculties and followed his vain desires are destined to make abode in Hell where the flames will lay upon them a sure watch that they cannot evade.
    122. This is the inevitable end of Satan’s followers, but those who believe in Allah will be requited with what is commensurate with their deeds. They believed in Allah and His Messenger, did righteous deeds, and never followed false illusions. Allah will welcome them into Gardens of bliss beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will have passed through nature to eternity, a solemn promise made by Allah. And who is more truthful than Allah?
    123. The hope of some reward, whether merited or unmerited, peculiar to man is a desire not in accord with Allah’s legislative and religious code. Therefore, it is neither according to your desires, Muslims, nor is it according to the desires of the People of the Book (Jews and Christians) that Allah proceeds. He who commits himself to an evil line of conduct will be punished for it and will suffer for his offense; he will not find a guardian besides Allah, nor can anyone help him.
    124. And whoever does good deeds according to his capacity while he believes in Allah and His Messenger, will be welcomed into Paradise. They will never be wronged, not even as little as the speck in a date stone. There is no distinction between male and female.  
    125. Righteous deeds stem from pure faith, and the best of them are those done only for Allah’s sake. So man should turn his face to Allah, seeking nothing but Allah’s favor. Here and then his senses get purified and he realizes the message brought by the messengers, practices the best of deeds, and follows Ibrahim (Abraham), the father of the prophets, as his religion is the true religion of Allah that always guides to the truth. Ibrahim is the converging point at which the religious unity of Muslims, Jews, and Christian meets. So, follow his track. Allah has distinguished him by His outstanding bondman!
    126.Genuine belief in Allah and submission to Him are genuine belief in Him Who created this universe and controls it, for to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth, including stars, celestial bodies, the sun, the moon, and the earth. And Allah is Ever-Cognizant of all things.
    127. And those who conformed to Islam seek counsel from you, Muhammad, concerning women—how to act toward them and deal justly with them. Allah replied to their question regarding women, helpless members of the family, and orphans. And He mentions that the orphan females who marry but are denied their due, young children, and orphans should be kindly and justly treated. And whatever deed you imprint with wisdom and piety is an honorable deed; it always comes to Allah’s knowledge.
    128. And if a woman is apprehensive about her husband’s ill treatment—that is, neglect or desertion—they incur no blame should they reconcile their quarrel and reconcile themselves with Allah, for the action of reconciling persons is consistent with piety. Greed and failure to admit a point in argument or to concede anything asked or required end in prejudice. But if you turn your thoughts on moral excellence and benevolence and revere Allah, you will find that Allah is Well-Acquainted with all that you do.
    129. You will never be able to do equity and justice to women through love and absolute equity in the case of multiple wives, however much you wish to do so. Therefore, do not disincline yourselves altogether from any of them so as to keep her in suspense and anguish. But you must reform yourselves and establish family life on piety, and revere Allah as He deserves. Thus you will find that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    130. And should they fail to reconcile and thus divorce, then Allah will make them independent of each other. He will compensate each of them for what has been lost out of His bounty, which flows freely and abundantly from the fountains of His grace. Great is Allah the Lord. He is ever All-Sufficient. His mercy is vast and His wisdom is infinite.
    131. The essence of religion is to surrender to the Lord of the universe, to acknowledge His infinite authority. To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. And by virtue of this infinite authority He said: We have enjoined those who were given the Book before you as well as you Muslims to revere Allah, worship Him, and  acknowledge His Authority. Then you must realize that to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. And Allah is Ever-Affluent, Absolute, and Worthy of all praise. 
    132. And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth, as He is the infinite authority. And enough is Allah to be your Guardian Who keeps protecting vigilance over the people so that they may worship Him, rely on Him, and revere Him.
    133. O people, you live in Allah’s dominion. He is Ever-Powerful, All-Mighty. If He wills, He can do away with you people and replace you with others. And Allah is Ever-Able to do all things to effect this.
    134. And whoever seeks the mundane things that minister to his enjoyment and content here below through the righteous ways and means, must realize that Allah will confer all the divine things that conduce to His mercy and grace in this life and in the Hereafter. Allah is ever All-Hearing and ever All-Seeing of all that you do.
    135. Equity is the basis of life and the uncontroversial law. So, you who have conformed to Allah and the call of His messengers, charge yourselves with equity, recourse to the principles of justice, and exercise your authority and power in maintenance of right. Rich or poor as they may be, Allah is He Who is more capable of guarding their interests. Therefore, do not be influenced by emotion, nor let passion conquer reason and sway you from justice. And if you should swerve from this course of action, you must realize that Allah has always been ever Well-Acquainted with all that you do.
    136. Indeed, the heavenly messages are one, as the Sender is One, that is, Allah. O you who believe, submit to Allah and be sincere to Him; believe in His Messenger Muhammad and in all that is mentioned in the Book revealed to him; act according to its teachings; and believe in the Book He sent down before (without any distortion or change). Believe in all of that, for he who disbelieves in Allah, the Lord of the universe, His angels, His Books, His messengers, and the Day of Resurrection will have erred and strayed far into error.
    137. Indeed, belief is absolute submission and incessant commitment to the truth. Those with hesitant and shaken belief are not believers. That is, those who conform to Islam, then turn apostates, then again conform to Islam and again go over from Islam and, thus, sink deeply in disbelief—Allah will never forgive the evil they do, nor guide them to the right path, as Allah’s forgiveness requires total abandonment of evil, and His guidance is only given to those who direct their faces to the right and seek it. 
    138. Announce to the hypocrites, Muhammad, that they must expect a painful torment.
    139. Those hypocrites favor to take the disbelievers who deny Allah as their guardians and to abandon the believers. Do they seek honor and power at their hands and pride themselves in so doing? But all power, omnipotence, and honor rest in Allah’s hands. He confers it on His believing servants. He who seeks honor from Allah gets it.
    140. Allah has been sending to you "Muslims" in the Book (the Qur’an) that whenever you hear a verse from the Book, you believe in it;  whereas the disbelievers deny and ridicule it. So, if you hear Allah’s revelations challenged and denied and ridiculed by those who are losers, then do not keep company with them until they have changed the subject of conversation, and virtue and wisdom no longer sit in want, lest you be like them. Allah will gather the hypocrites and the disbelievers all together in the kingdom of Hell.
    141. Such persons watch you closely with hatred and envy and wish you the worst when you are fighting the enemies, and they are on the watch for opportunities. If Allah graces you with His guardianship and victory, they, stunned by your victory, say to you, “Have we not been on your side as a part of your community?” And if good fortune comes to the disbelievers who deny Allah, they say to them, “Did we not back you up and avert the disaster that would have befallen you at the hands of the Muslims?” Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection and Judgment, and Allah will never give the advantage to the cause of the disbelievers over that of the Muslims so long as the Muslims are committed to belief and righteous deeds.
    142. The hypocrites imagine that they deceive Allah and hide their reality from Him, while, in fact, He deceives them by giving them enough rope to allow them free scope of action in order that they commit themselves to an evil line of conduct, then He requites them for their deeds. The material aspect is manifested when they stand to perform prayer: they are dispirited and despondent; they perform their prayer only to attract notice and win the admiration of people. They hardly remember Allah; had they mentioned Him, they would have cleansed themselves from hypocrisy. 
    143. They are swayed in their opinions and their actions, while in truth they belong neither to these nor to those due to their lack of faith and their shaken character. You will never find a way to guide him whom Allah does not guide to the path of righteousness.
    144. Among the reasons for hypocrisy is that the hypocrites took the disbelievers as intimate friends and patrons. So, you who believe, do not take the disbelievers who deny Allah as intimate friends nor favor them as patrons. If you do that, Allah will take fault with you and include you in the circle of the hypocrites and humiliate you, as you do not seek your honor from Allah, from the truth, and from righteous deeds.
    145. Indeed, the hypocrites are destined to the abode in the deep bottomless abyss of Hell, and you will never find anyone to vindicate them.
    146. But such a misfortune would be cancelled in favor of those who repent, amend their ways, declare the truth, choose to be under His guardianship, and faithfully conform to His system of faith and worship. Allah will include such persons in the circle of those whose hearts have believed, and Allah will requite the faithful who are firm in belief and allegiance to Him a great reward in this life and in the Hereafter.
    147. Indeed, Allah only asks you to believe in Him and acknowledge His favor upon you. If you do so, Allah will not inflict any punishment on you, but He will reward you for being grateful. Allah has always acknowledged what is esteemed a worthy deed; and He is All-Knowing of all that you do, be it good or evil.
    148. Allah forbids His servants to utter evil words unless it be in redressing grievances. Then they are allowed to complain against the aggressors. And Allah is ever All-Hearing and ever All-Knowing of the aggression and requites the aggressor.
    149. Whether you make your wise and pious deed publicly known or you conceal it from the notice of others, or if you forgive and give up resentment against an offender or remit the penalty for an offense. You must realize that Allah is ever Oft-Pardoning, All-Powerful.
    150. Indeed, those who disbelieve in Allah and refuse to acknowledge His messengers and wish to dissociate them from Allah and say that they believe only in some messengers, and thus they believe in whom they like and deny whom they dislike taking a way in-between, whereas it is incumbent to believe in all of them—
    151. These and such persons are disbelievers, indeed, and Allah has prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment.
    152. Whereas those who believe in Allah and recognize His messengers and do not discriminate one from another, will be recipients of the grace of Allah, Who will requite them with what is commensurate with their deeds. And Allah is All-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    153. And the People of the Book insolently ask you, Muhammad, for evidence that proves the truthfulness of your prophethood, that is, a Book that you would cause to descend upon them from heaven to attest your message, and call upon them to believe in you and obey you! But greater was their irreverence to Musa (Moses), whom their ancestors asked to show them Allah openly so that they might perceive Him by sight. Then heaven thundered against them and the fearful echoes struck with thunderbolt in consequence of their blasphemy against Allah. And worse was the reverence and veneration they paid to the Calf that they worshiped and adored besides Allah. And this odd disposition strangely ran in their heads after they had received enough signs to guide them out of darkness into illumination and enlightenment. Yet Allah pardoned them and remitted the penalty of their serious offense and conferred on Musa delegated power and made him stand manifest of authority.
    154. And Allah raised the mount above the Children of Isra'il to force them to reconsider the Law of the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) until they did. Then Allah made a covenant with them and commanded them to enter the town humbling themselves to Him and refraining from breaking the Sabbath that Allah had set apart for rest and worship. Allah entered into a paramount covenant with them to bind them by it.
    155. Allah brought His wrath on them because they broke the divine covenant, denied Allah’s revelations, wrongfully slew the prophets, and insolently said that their hearts were deaf and that their hearts treasured every branch of divine knowledge and wisdom so that they could absorb no more. In fact, Allah imprinted their hearts with disbelief and impiety for how greatly shaken was their faith in Allah.
    156. They incurred Allah’s wrath for their disbelief and their slanderous calumny against Maryam (Virgin Mary).
    157. And for their false allegation that they slew the Messiah, `Isa the son of Maryam (Jesus the son of Mary), the Messenger of Allah, when in fact they never killed him, nor did they crucify him but they thought they did, but a resemblance of him was presented to them. Then they disputed his fate in a state of uncertainty as to the truth and reality of the incident. Their belief was based on empty knowledge and their supposition was formed on grounds admittedly insufficient, for, indeed, in no way did they kill him.
    158. But Allah took him up to His august presence and saved him from his enemies. And Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    159. And there is no one among the People of the Book but will recognize the reality of `Isa before his death—that is that he is Allah’s Servant and Messenger. And on the Day of Judgment, `Isa will be a witness against them, stating that he conveyed the message to them and that he is Allah’s Servant and Messenger.
    160. And in consequence of their iniquities and wrongdoing, Allah denied them some good and wholesome foods that were lawful to them previously, and for their frequent standing in the way to prevent Allah’s truth from guiding people into all truth.
    161. Also for their ill-gotten gain from interest (riba), which they had been utterly forbidden to practice, and for their unlawful organized scheme to eat people out of their property. And Allah has prepared for those of them who are disobedient rebels a painful torment.
    162. But those of them with well-founded knowledge and the believers from your followers who are acquainted with the facts, believe in all that has been revealed to you, Muhammad, and in all that was revealed to those who were sent before you. They constantly observe their act of worship and give alms, they believe in Allah and in the Day of Resurrection. It is those whom We will requite with a great reward.
    163. We have revealed to you, Muhammad, a Book and a divine message, as We revealed before you to Nuh (Noah) and to the prophets who followed him. And We revealed divine messages to Ibrahim (Abraham) and Isma`il (Ishmael), to Ishaq (Isaac) and Ya`qub (Jacob) and to the tribes of his twelve sons, who are Allah’s prophets and descendants of Ya`qub, to `Isa (Jesus) and Ayyub (Job), to Yunus (Jonah) and Harun (Aaron) and to Sulayman (Soloman). And to Dawud (David) We gave the Zabur (Psalms).
    164. And We (revealed) divine messages to many messengers whom We mentioned to you before and to others whom We did not mention to you. And to Musa (Moses) Allah spoke, and to him He declared the divine message in eloquent speech.
    165. Such messengers were sent as bearers of good news and of warnings so that people have no excuse, nor can they plea against Allah after they had been warned by Allah’s messengers. And Allah is All-Mighty; there is no authority besides Him. And He is All-Wise in whatever He decides.
    166. But if they have not acknowledged the truthfulness of your message, Allah is a Witness of all that He has revealed to you by His authority, and to this effect do the angels bear witness, and enough is Allah Himself to be the witness.
    167. Indeed, those who did not believe and who stood in the way to prevent Allah’s truth from guiding people to all truth have been led far into the depth of the maze of error.
    168. And those who denied Allah and wronged themselves and were wrongful to the Prophet by denying his message, and were wrongful to the people by barring them from the truth—Allah will never forgive them or guide them to the path of righteousness,
    169. But only to the path that leads directly to Hell, wherein they will have passed to eternal suffering. And this is indeed quite easy for Allah to effect.
    170. O you people, the Messenger of Allah has come to you with the divine message of the truth authorized by Allah. Therefore, you had better conform to Allah’s system of faith and worship. And if you deny Allah and the mission of His Messenger, then (you must realize that) to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. And Allah is All-Knowing of His creation and All-Wise in His decisions. 
    171. O People of the Book, do not carry your religious beliefs to excess and beyond the truth, nor should you say anything about Allah but the truth. You should not deny the message of `Isa (Jesus), for `Isa is the Messenger of Allah. He is simply His Word He authoritatively cast forth to Maryam (Mary) and a spirit that proceeded from Him. Therefore, you had better believe in Allah and acknowledge His messengers. Abandon this wrongful saying; this is only to your benefit. Allah is only and absolutely One, glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes. His omnipotence precludes begetting a son when all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth belong to Him. And enough is Allah to be your Guardian Who exercises protecting vigilance over you.
    172. Indeed, the Messiah, `Isa son of Maryam (Jesus son of Mary), will never turn indignant for being a Servant of Allah, nor will the angels nearest to Allah. And he who turns indignant for serving Allah and becomes arrogant and displays inordinate selfesteem will be gathered to His august presence on the Day of Judgment.
    173. But those who believed in Allah and did deeds with wisdom and piety will be requited by Allah with what is commensurate with their deeds. And out of His bounty He will reward them even more. Whereas those who turned indignant and were arrogant will be requited with a painful torment. And they will never find a guardian besides Allah, nor can anyone vindicate them.
    174. O people, now a proof has come to you from Allah your Lord, a convincing proof of the truthfulness of Muhammad’s message. And We have sent down to you illumination and enlightenment.  
    175. Therefore, those who accepted Allah and His messages and chose to be under His guardianship—He will admit their claim to His blessings and extend to them His mercy, grace them with His bounty, and guide them to His path of righteousness.
    176. Your people seek counsel from you, Muhammad, concerning the deceased who is childless and parentless. Say to them, “Allah announces the reply to your question concerning the childless and parentless thus: If a man dies and he has no child nor a parent but he has a sister, then she has the rightful claim to one half of what he has left. And should the reverse be the case, then he inherits all her property if she has no child. And if the deceased in question has two sisters, then they share equally in two-thirds of what he left. And if they are a mixed company of men and women—brothers and sisters—then the male inherits the equivalent of what is apportioned to two females. Allah sets forth for you in detail the principles governing inheritance of property so that you do not go into error. And Allah is All-Knowing of all your deeds and actions, and He will requite you with what is commensurate with your deeds.”


