SURAH 5
AL-MA IDAH
The Table Spread
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah, like the three preceding long surahs, considers several subjects, but they all have in common the raising of a nation that stands upon the vantage ground of truth and recognizes wholeheartedly the oneness, uniqueness, omnipotence, omniscience, and ultimate authority of Allah, the One and only God, the Creator. In this respect, the Qur’an constitutes the chosen system of faith and worship. Acceptance of the system and submission to the precepts are part of the belief in the One God. 
    The title of the surah alludes to the table spread with food that was sent down from Heaven in answer to the wish of the disciples of `Isa (Jesus). Among the subjects discussed in the surah, we find:
    One must honor one’s word, promise, and vow.
    `Isa the son of Maryam (Jesus the son of Mary) and his mother are mortals. 
    Allah is absolutely One, and not in Trinity.
    Allah is not the father of anyone, but He is the Creator of all.
    The final word regarding intoxicants, gambling, divination, and the like is revealed. Intoxicants were prohibited gradually, in four stages: (1) 4:43; (2) 2:219; (3) 5:90; (4) 5:91.
    The rules regarding forbidden and permitted foods are revealed. 
    Religious acts and rites are to be honored.
    We are told some shortcomings and misgivings of the Children of Isra'il.
    The authentic Tawrah and Injil (the Books revealed to Musa [Moses] and `Isa [Jesus], respectively) were standard Laws to be followed, but they were not followed.
    Rules of retaliation and forgiveness are revealed.
    Justice must be done, even if the accused is an enemy.
    The Qur’an is the Book of reference, the Judge of all preceding Books, and the standard Law. Judgment based on its precepts is final.
    Rules for ablution before prayers are revealed.
    We are told the narrative of Adam’s sons.
    Rules regarding false oaths and their expiation are revealed.
    
    The religion chosen for mankind, namely, Islam, is completed.
    Rules regarding thieves are revealed.
    
  
    1. O you who believe, fulfill all the contracts you have concluded with Allah and with people. Allah has made the brutes of cattle, camels, sheep, and goats lawful to you, except whatever is declared prohibited to you, without violating the prohibition against hunting game when you are in the state of consecration for pilgrimage. Surely Allah judges according to whatever He wills, and Allah’s contracts are binding to you.
    2. O you who believe, do not violate the waymarks of Allah, such as the rites of Hajj and all other Shari`ah rulings. Nor violate the inviolable months by waging war in them, nor the offering, nor the garlands that are put around the necks of the sacrificial animals as a declaration of performing Hajj. Nor bar the ones repairing to the Inviolable House seeking grace and satisfaction from their Lord. And when you are not on pilgrimage and are out of the sanctified area, all blessed, then (you may) go game hunting. And do not let the antagonism of a people who barred you from the Inviolable Mosque provoke you to transgress. And help one another to benignity and piety, and do not help one another to vice and hostility. And be pious and fear Allah; surely Allah is strict in punishment.
    3. Prohibited to you believers are carrion—dead animals that are not slaughtered—and blood, and the flesh of swine, and what has been dedicated to other than Allah, and the strangled, and the beaten (to death) and the toppled (to death) and the gored (to death) and that killed by wild beasts of prey—except what you have immolated—and whatever has been slain on the standards (for the idols). And you must adjure division by divining. Committing any of these prohibited things is immoral and a great sin. Today the ones who have disbelieved have despaired of your religion, so do not be apprehensive of them but be apprehensive of Me. Today I have completed the rulings of your religion for you, and I have perfected My favor on you by empowering and supporting you, and I have chosen Islam as a religion for you. And whoever is constrained by scarcity (of food), without unfairly inclining to vice, then surely Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    4. The believers ask you, Messenger, what is made lawful to them. Say to them, “The good things are made lawful to you. The hunting creatures you train as hounds, teaching them (part) of what Allah has taught you.” So eat of whatever they hold back for you, and mention the name of Allah over it. And be pious and fear Allah by observing what He has decreed for you and never transgress. Surely Allah is swift at the reckoning.
    5. Today the good things are made lawful for you, and the food and the slaughtered animals of the ones to whom the Book was brought [Christians and Jews] are lawful to you, and your food is made lawful to them. And so are believing women lawful in wedlock, and the women of the ones to whom the Book was brought before you are lawful to you in wedlock when you have brought them their rewards [dower]. But do not take them in fornication or take them to yourselves as mates without marriage. And whoever disbelieves the religion of Allah, then his deed has been frustrated and in the Hereafter he is among the losers. 
    6. O you who believe, when you rise up for prayer, perform the rites of ablution by washing your faces, and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe all or a part of your heads, and (wash) your legs to the ankles. And in case you are ritually unclean due to sexual discharge, then totally purify yourselves by washing your whole bodies. And in case you are suffering from an illness that prevents you from using water or you are on a journey, or in case any of you has come from the toilet or privy, or you have had contact with women, yet you cannot find water, then have recourse to good soil and so wipe your faces and hands with it. Allah does not want to make any restriction for you, but, indeed, He wants to purify you and perfect His favor on you, that possibly you would thank Him by persisting in obeying Him.
    7. And remember the favor of Allah upon you in guiding you to Islam, and fulfill His covenant by which He has solemnly bound you as you said to His Messenger Muhammad, “We have heard and we obey.” And be pious and fear Allah. Surely Allah is Ever-Knowing of the inmost thoughts in the hearts and will requite you accordingly.
    8. O you who believe, constantly keep Allah’s covenants. Witness with equity, and do not let the antagonism of a people provoke you to not do justice. Stick to justice; that is the nearest way to piety and to avoiding Allah’s wrath. And be pious and fear Allah in whatever you do. Surely Allah is Ever-Cognizant of whatever you do.
    9. Allah has shown His favors and promised the ones who believe and do deeds of righteousness that they will have forgiveness and a magnificent reward.
    10. And the ones who have disbelieved and denied the signs attesting to His oneness and the truthfulness of His message will be the companions of Hellfire.
    11. O you who believe, remember the favor of Allah upon you (in hardships) when a group of disbelievers designed to inflict a severe harm on you and your Prophet, and Allah restrained their hands from you. Be pious and fear Allah, and trust in Allah alone. It is a characteristic of a Muslim to put his trust only in Allah.
    12. And indeed Allah already took a covenant with the Children of Isra'il (that they would listen and obey), and He sent forth among them twelve chieftains to observe the fulfillment of the covenant. And Allah has promised them that He surely will be with them if they keep up the prayer, pay the zakah (alms), believe in His messengers and rally to assist them, and lend to Allah a fair loan. He will expiate for them their odious deeds, and He will cause them to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow. So who of them disbelieves after that has readily erred away from the straight path.
    13. So, for their breaking their covenant, they were cursed out of Allah’s mercy and their hearts were made too hard to accept the truth. They pervert the words of Allah in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) from their contexts and they have forgotten a portion of what they were reminded. And you will not cease viewing some treacherous act on their part, except for a few of them (who believed you and never cheated or betrayed you). Yet be clement towards them and pardon them; surely Allah loves the good-doers. 
    14. And Allah took a covenant with the Christians, who said, “We believe in the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]) and in the oneness of Allah.” Yet they have forgotten a portion of what they were reminded of, so Allah induced among them enmity and abhorrence till the Day of Resurrection. And Allah will eventually fully inform them of what they used to do (and requite them accordingly). 
    15. O you People of the Book, Our Messenger Muhammad has come to you to call you to the truth. He makes evident to you many things of the Book you have been concealing, and he is clement about many other unnecessary things. A complete system of law has come to you from Allah as a light and an evident Book.
    16. With it Allah guides any who seek His blessed satisfaction, and He brings them out of the darkness (of disbelief) into the light (of faith) by His permission, and He guides them to the path of truth.
    17. They who claimed that Allah is the Masih (Messiah) son of Maryam have indeed readily disbelieved. Say to them, Messenger, “Who then can avail anything against Allah if He wills to cause the Masih son of Maryam and his mother and whoever is on the earth together to perish?” And to Allah belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them. He creates whatever He decides, and Allah is Ever-Determiner over everything.
    18. And the Jews and Christians have said, “We are the favored, as we are the children of Allah and His beloved ones.” Say to them, Messenger, “Why then does He torment you for your guilty deeds?” No, indeed, you are mortals, of all the mortals He has created. He forgives whomever He decides, and He torments whomever He decides, for to Allah belong the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them, and to Him is the Destiny. 
    19. O People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to you making things evident to you, after an interval between the messengers, so that you should not say, “There has not come to us any bearer of good tidings and a warner.” Yet now there has come to you a bearer of good tidings and a warner. And Allah is Ever-Determiner over everything, including sending messengers and requiting you for your deeds.
    20. And remember, Messenger, as Musa (Moses) said to his people, “O my people, remember the favor of Allah upon you by obeying Him and thanking Him for His favors. He made among you many prophets, and made you as powerful as kings (after you were slaves to Pharaoh), and brought you what He had not brought to anyone of the worlds.
    21. “My people, obey Allah and enter the Holy Land that Allah has prescribed for you. And do not turn back, for then you would be losers.”
    22. His people said, “O Musa, surely there are people in it who are giants, and we will never enter it until they go out of it. So, in case they go out of it, then we will enter.”
    23. Two men of the ones that feared Allah and whom Allah had favored said, “Enter upon them through the gate of the city. So, when you enter it, then surely you will overcome them. And so put all your trust in Allah if you are true believers.”
    24. They insisted on disobeying and said, “O Musa, surely we will never enter it at all so long as the giants are in it. So leave us and go forth, you and your Lord, and then you two fight them. So we will be sitting here now!”
    25. There and then Musa said to Allah, “Lord, surely I have no authority over anyone except myself and my brother, so distinguish between us and these immoral people.”
    26. Allah responded (positively) to Musa and decreed that it would be prohibited for them for forty years while they strayed on the earth. And He said to Musa (to relieve him), “Do not feel sad about the immoral people.”
    27. A tendency to aggression is a part of some peoples’ dispositions. So recite with the truth to them (the Jews), O Prophet, the story of the two sons of Adam. They offered a sacrifice, and it was graciously accepted of the sincere one of them (Habil [Abel]) and not graciously accepted of the other (Qabil [Cain]) due to his lack of sincerity. So, the latter envied his brother and pledged that he would definitely kill him. The first explained to him that, surely, Allah graciously accepts only from the pious.
    28. And he (Habil) said to him, “Indeed, if you to stretch out your hand against me to kill me, in no way will I stretch out my hand against you to kill you. Surely I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    29. “Surely, I would like that you incur upon yourself my vice and your vice, and so you become one of the companions of the Fire, and that is the recompense of the unjust.”
    30. Then his (Qabil’s) self persuaded him to kill his brother. So he killed him; then he became among the losers (as he lost his faith and his brother). 
    31. Then, he became so distressed and sorry and wondered what he would do with his brother’s body. Then Allah sent a raven searching in the earth to bury a dead raven and to show him how to cover the body of his brother. He said, “Woe is me! Am I unable to be like this raven and so cover the body of my brother?” And so he became among the remorseful.
    32. On that account We prescribed for the Children of Isra'il the killing of the killer, for if anyone takes a life not in retaliation of killing a human being nor for corruption on the earth—then it shall be as if he had killed all of mankind (as he violated the sacredness of life and encouraged others to violate it). And if anyone gives a life, then it shall be as if he had given life to all of mankind, and he deserves a great reward from Allah. And indeed Our messengers have already come to them with supreme evidence. Surely many of the Children of Isra'il after that were extravagant in extending corruption on the earth.
    33. Surely the only recompense of those who war against Allah and His Messenger and diligently endeavor to do corruption in the earth is that they should be all killed in retaliation for killing; or crucified if they killed and stole money; or their alternate hands and legs should be amputated if they took money by force but killed nobody; or they should be exiled from the land if they terrified the people. That is a disgrace for them in the present life, and in the Hereafter they will have a tremendous torment. 
    34. Except for the ones who repent even before you are capable of punishing them, and the criminals have to give the property back to the victims. So know that Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful. 
    35. O you who believe, be pious and fear Allah by obeying His commands and admonition, and seek close proximity to Him, and strive in His way to spread His religion, and fight His enemies so that possibly you would prosper.
    36. Surely the ones who have disbelieved—even if they have whatever is on the earth entirely and the like of it with which to ransom themselves from Allah’s torment of the Day of Resurrection—in no way would it be favorably accepted of them, and they will have a painful torment.
    37. These disbelievers would like to get out of the Fire, but in no way will they be going out of it, and they will have a perpetual torment.
    38. And the male thief and the female thief—cut off the hands of both as a recompense for what they have earned (and to disgust whoever thinks of committing this crime), as a torture from Allah. And Allah is Ever-Mighty, Ever-Wise, Who decides a deterring punishment for each crime.
    39. Yet whoever repents and does righteousness even after his injustice and acts righteously, then surely Allah relents on him. Surely Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    40. Bear in mind, you who are competent, that to Allah belong the heavens and the earth. He torments whomever He decides according to His wisdom and omnipotence, and He forgives whomever He decides according to His wisdom and mercy. Allah is Ever-Determiner over everything.
    41. O Messenger, do not let those that vie to fall into disbelief grieve you—of such cheaters who say “we believe” with their mouths, but their hearts do not believe. And among those Judaized are constant listeners to lies, and constant listeners to other people who have not come up to you, perverting the wordings from their original meanings after Allah has made them succinct. They say to their followers, “If you are given these wordings, then take them; in case you are not brought them, then beware.” So never feel sad, for whomever Allah wills for temptation (by rejecting His religion), there is nothing you can do to guide him to the right path. Those are they who have gone so far in disbelief and whose hearts Allah is not willing to purify. For them is disgrace in the present life, and in the Hereafter they will have a tremendous torment.
    42. Constant listeners to lies, constant eaters of illicit, unblessed gain. So in case they come for you to judge between them, then judge between them if you see it useful, or veer away from them. And if you veer away from them, then they will never harm you a thing, as Allah will protect you from the people. And if you judge, then judge with equity between them. Surely Allah loves the equitable ones.
    43. And how do they make you their judge and the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) is in their presence, wherein is the judgment of Allah? Thereafter they turn away even after that. And in no way are those the real believers.
    44. Surely We sent down the Tawrah to Musa (Moses), wherein there is guidance and light applied by the prophets who have surrendered to Allah to those who Judaized. And so do the rabbis and the doctors of Law, who were entrusted to keep their Book from any perversion and attest to its truthfulness. So do not be apprehensive of mankind, but be apprehensive of Me, your Creator and the Creator of the whole world. And do not trade My signs for a little price such as interest (riba) or pride. And any who do not judge according to what Allah has sent down, are disbelievers.
    45. And therein We prescribed for them the law of retaliation to preserve the lives of the people: the life for the life, the eye for the eye, the nose for the nose, the ear for the ear, the tooth for the tooth, and retaliation for wounds. But if anyone remits the retaliation as a charity, then it is expiation for him, and Allah will forgive some of his sins due to it. And any who do not judge according to what Allah has sent down are the unjust.
    46. And We sent `Isa son of Maryam (Jesus son of Mary) on their tracks, sincerely verifying the Tawrah (Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) that was sent before him. And We brought him the Injil (Book revealed to `Isa), in which there is a guidance and a light, and which sincerely verifies the Tawrah that was sent before him, and a guidance and an admonition to the pious.
    47. And We commanded the followers of `Isa and the Injil to judge according to what Allah has sent down therein. And any who do not judge according to what Allah has sent down, then those are the immoral.
    48. And We have sent down to you, Prophet, the Book, that is, the Qur’an, with the truth, sincerely verifying the Book that was before it, and supremely hegemonic  over it due to its being kept from perversion. So judge between them according to what Allah has sent down, and do not ever follow their prejudices away from the truth that has come to you. To every one of you We have made a law and a program. And if Allah had so decided, He would indeed have made you one nation with one orientation that does not change by time, but [He did not so] that He may try you in what He has brought you, so that He may distinguish the obedient from the disobedient. So race with each other in charitable deeds. The return of you all will be to Allah. He will fully inform you of what you used to differ about, and He will requite you according to your deeds.
    49. And We commanded that you should judge between them according to what Allah has sent down. Do not ever follow their prejudices; beware of them lest they should tempt you away from some part of what Allah has sent down to you. So, in case they turn away from Allah’s ruling to another ruling, then know that Allah wills only to afflict them for some of their guilty deeds. Indeed, many of mankind are immoral.
    50. Do they who turn away from Allah’s commands and admonitions want to resort to the judgment of (pagan) ignorance that lacks equity? And who is fairer in judgment than Allah, for a people having certitude?
    51. O you who believe, do not take to yourselves the Jews and the Christians as patrons; some of them are patrons to some others. And any of you who patronizes them is surely one of them. Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people who take to themselves the disbelievers as patrons.
    52. Because only the unjust patronize them, you see the ones in whose hearts is sickness vie with one another among them. They say, “We are apprehensive lest a turn of bad fortune should afflict us.” Yet it may be that Allah will come with the conquest and victory over the enemies or disclose the hypocrisy of the hypocrites, so they will be remorseful for what they kept secret within themselves.
    53. There and then, the true believers will say, “Are these the ones who swore by Allah their most earnest oaths that surely they were with you in religion and believers like you?” Their deeds are frustrated, so they lost their faith and the believers’ support.
    54. O you who believe, any of you who revert from faith to disbelief will not harm Allah in the least—supremely exalted be He above that. Allah will bring a people better than they, whom He loves and guides to guidance and obedience, and who love Him. They are humble toward the believers, mightily stern toward the disbelievers, and strive in the way of Allah. They do not fear the blame of any blamer. That is the grace of Allah that He brings to whomever He decides. And Allah is Ever-Embracing, Ever-Knowing.
    55. Surely your patrons are only Allah and His Messenger and the ones who believe—those who keep up the prayer, give zakah (alms), and bow to Allah.
    56. And any who take Allah, His Messenger, and the ones who believe as their patrons—then surely the party of Allah are the victorious.
    57. O you who believe, do not take as patrons the ones who take your religion in mockery and as a plaything, that is, who were brought the Book before you, and the disbelievers; and be pious and fear Allah if you are true believers.
    58. And a sign of their derision is that when you call to prayer, they mockingly mimic the act of worship. This is because they are a people who lack the faculty of understanding so that they cannot distinguish error from guidance.
    59. Say, "O people of the Book, "Do you take vengeance on us for anything except that we believe in Allah and what has been sent down to us, and what has been sent down before, and that most of you are immoral?"
    60. Say to them, “Shall I fully inform you of what is more evil than that with regard to the requital at the meeting with Allah? It is your deeds for which Allah has driven you away from His mercy and cast His wrath upon them, so they became monkeys and swine, and worshiped Satan. Those are in an eviler place [on the Day of Judgment] and they have erred farther away from the straight path.”
    61. And when the hypocrites come to you, they lie to you saying, “We believe,” when in fact they have come in with disbelief and they come out with the same. And Allah knows the hypocrisy they hide, and He will requite them with what they keep secret.
    62. And you see many of them hurry to vie in vice and hostility and to eat illicit gains such as interest (riba) and bribes. Miserable indeed is whatever they used to do!
    63. If only their rabbis and canonists had forbidden them from speaking evil and eating illicit gains! Miserable indeed is whatever they used to do. 
    64. And the Jews have said, “The hand of Allah is shackled.” Shackled are their hands, and they are cursed for what they have said! No, indeed, but Allah is the most generous; both His hands are outspread; He expends how He decides. And, indeed, what has been sent down to you from your Creator will increase many of them in inordinacy and disbelief, due to the hatred and vice that their hearts hide; and We have cast enmity and abhorrence among them till the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they kindle fire to fight against the Messenger and the believers, Allah extinguishes it (and grants victory to His Messenger and his followers). And they endeavor diligently on the earth to corrupt; and Allah does not love the corrupters.
    65. And if the People of the Book (Jews and Christians) had believed in Islam and the Messenger and been pious, We would, indeed, have expiated their odious deeds and caused them to enter the Gardens of Bliss.
    66. And if they had kept the Tawrah (Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and the Injil (Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]) (as they were sent down), acted according to the teachings therein, and believed in what was sent down to them from their Lord (that is, the Qur’an) they would indeed have gotten provision from above them and from beneath their feet. Among them is a moderate nation; and many of them are odious whatever they do.
    67. O Messenger, proclaim whatever has been sent down to you from your Lord and call them to believe in it. And if you do not perform that, you have not proclaimed His message. You were entrusted to convey it to them all, and Allah safeguards you from mankind. Surely Allah does not guide the disbelieving people to the Right Path.
    68. O Messenger, say to the People of the Book, “You have nothing (of guidance) until you keep up all the rulings that have been sent down in the Tawrah and the Injil and act according to them and believe in the revelation sent down to you from your Lord (that is, the Qur’an).” Indeed, what has been sent down to you from your Lord will increase many of them in inordinacy and disbelief, so do not feel sad for the disbelieving people.
    69. Surely the ones who have believed in Allah, and the Judaized, the Sabi'un and the Nasara—if they sincerely believe in Allah, resurrection and requital, and do righteous deeds (as instructed by Islam), then no fear will be on them, nor will they grieve.  
    70. Indeed We already took a covenant with the Children of Isra'il in the Tawrah to follow its rulings, and We sent many messengers to explain the rulings to them. But they broke their covenant. Whenever a messenger came to them with what their selves did not yearn for, they accused some of them of lying and they killed some of them.
    71. And they reckoned that there should be no hardships that distinguish the steadfast from the weak. So they were willfully blind and willfully deaf, yet afterward, when they repented, Allah relented on them and granted them power. Then, after that, many of them were willfully blind and willfully deaf. And Allah is Ever-Seeing of whatever they do.
    72. Indeed, the ones who have said “surely Allah is the Masih son of Maryam (the Messiah son of Mary)” have already disbelieved. And the Masih commanded the Children of Isra'il to sincerely worship Allah, saying, “Allah is my Lord and your Lord.” Surely, whoever associates anything with Allah has already been prohibited entrance to the Garden by Allah, and his abode will be the Fire. And the unjust will not have any vindicators.
    73. Indeed, the ones who have said that Allah is the third of three have already disbelieved. In no way is there any god except Allah alone. And if they do not refrain from what they say and obey Allah, a painful torment will touch those of them who have disbelieved.
    74. Will they not then abandon their false beliefs and repent to Allah and ask His forgiveness? And Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    75. In no way is the Masih son Maryam anything but a messenger on whom Allah has conferred His message. The messengers before him already passed away, and his mother was constantly sincere. They both used to eat food. Look how clear We make the signs to them. Then look again how they swerve to falsehood.
    76. Say, Messenger, to these disbelievers, “How can you worship, apart from Allah, that which neither harms nor benefits you? How can you do that, and Allah is The Ever-Hearing, The Ever-Knowing?”
    77. Say, Messenger, to the People of the Book (Jews and Christians), “Allah forbids you to go beyond the bounds in your religion or claim that some of His creation are gods or deny some of His messages. And do not (ever) follow the prejudices of a people who have already erred earlier and led many into error and erred away from the Right Path.”
    78. The Children of Isra'il who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of Dawud (David) and `Isa son of Maryam because they disobeyed and were transgressing.
    79. They used not to forbid one another any wickedness that they committed. Miserable, indeed, was whatever they used to do!
    80. You see many of them take the disbelievers as patrons (with the aim of supporting each other against Islam). So miserable, indeed, is whatever their own selves have forwarded. For that reason Allah’s wrath has fallen on them, and they are eternally abiding in the torment.  
    81. And if they had believed in Allah and the Prophet Muhammad and the Qur’an that has been sent down to him, they would not have taken them (the disbelievers) as patrons; but many of them are immoral.
    82. We assure you, Prophet, that you will find that the Jews and the ones who have associated other deities with Allah are the most serious in enmity to you and to those who believe in you. And you will find that the nearest in affection to you and to the ones who believe are the followers of `Isa who called themselves Christians. For among them are priests who know their religion and monks who fear their Lord, and they are not proud. 
    83. And when they hear the Qur’an that was sent down to the Messenger, they show that it touched their hearts, as they realize that it is the truth, and you see their eyes overflow with tears. They say, “Our Lord, we believe in You (and Your messengers and the truth You have sent down to them); so write us down among (the followers of Muhammad) whom You made witness on the Day of Resurrection.
    84. “And what is it with us that we do not believe in Allah alone and in what has come to us of the truth? And we long for our Lord to cause us to enter (the Garden) with the righteous people.”
    85. So, because of what they say, Allah has requited them with Gardens beneath whose trees and palaces rivers run. They will be eternally abiding therein, and that is the recompense of the good-doers.
    86. And the ones who disbelieved in Allah and denied His messengers and signs, are the companions of Hellfire.
    87. O you who believe, do not prohibit whatever good things Allah has made lawful for you, and do not transgress. Surely, Allah does not love the transgressors.
    88. And eat of whatever lawful and good things Allah has provided you, and be pious and fear Allah, in Whom you believe.
    89. Allah does not take you to task for anything unintentional in your oaths, but He takes you to task for contracts you have made by oath. The expiation thereof is to feed ten indigent persons with the average of what you feed to your own families, or to clothe them, or to free a slave. Yet, any who does not find the means must fast for three days. Any of these is the expiation of your oaths when you have sworn. And keep your oaths, and never neglect doing whatever expiates your oaths in case you break them. Thus Allah makes clear to you His rulings, that possibly you would thank Him.
    90. O you who believe in Allah, His Books, and His messengers, who submitted to the truth—surely wine and games of chance, altars (for idols), and divining are only an abomination of Satan’s doing, so avoid it, that possibly you would prosper (in life below and in the Hereafter). 
    91. Surely Satan would only like to excite enmity and abhorrence among you by means of wine and games of chance, to render you weak and enemies, and to bar you from the remembrance of Allah and prayer, (so that you might lead an awful life and face a bad end). So, knowing all these awful things, will they then refrain from what I forbade you?
    92. And obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and keep away from what exposes you to punishment. If you turn away from His commands, then know that He will surely punish you. It is only for Our Messenger to inform you of Our rulings and make them clear to you.
    93. It is not a sin in those who have believed and done righteous deeds if they ate unlawful food before they knew that it was unlawful—when they are pious, and believe the rulings Allah has ordained for them, and do righteous deeds; and again are pious and believe; and again are pious and do good deeds. And Allah loves the fair-doers.
    94. O you who believe, indeed Allah will definitely try you by prohibiting some of the game that your hands and lances reach, that Allah may know who fears Him unseen. So whoever transgresses after that will have a painful torment.
    95. O you who believe, do not kill the game while you are in the consecrated state of ihram for pilgrimage (hajj or `umrah). Any of you who kills it intentionally must recompense with the like of what he has killed in (grazing) livestock—camels, cows, sheep, and goats—as judged by two just men among you. He must give it as an offering to reach the Ka`bah; or, for expiation, feed indigent persons or fast the equivalent, so that he may taste the pernicious result of disobeying Allah’s command. Allah has been clement towards what is bygone; and whosoever goes back (to offense), then Allah will take vengeance on him; and Allah is Ever-Mighty, Owner of vengeance.
    96. The game and food of the sea are made lawful for you, as a necessary enjoyment for you and the travelers. And prohibited to you is the untamed game of the land, so long as you are in the consecrated state of ihram for hajj or `umarh. And be pious and fear Allah, to Whom you will be gathered.
    97. Allah has made the Ka`bah—the Inviolable House of mankind which He glorified and in which He prohibited transgression against man and animal—a safe and glorified place for mankind, to which they turn their faces in their prayers, and which they visit with the aim of asking for Allah’s favors and blessings. And He established the sacred month of hajj and the offerings with the garlands on their necks to show that they are offered to the House, so that they realize that Allah fully knows all that is in the heaven, from which the ordinances come down, and fully knows all that is in the earth; and Allah is indeed All-Knowing of everything.
    98. O people, know that Allah is strict in punishment and that Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    99. There is no duty for the Messenger except the proclamation of the message to you. And Allah knows whatever you display and whatever you keep back.
    100. O Prophet, say to the people, “The good that Allah made lawful to you and the bad that He prohibited to you are not equal, even if you admire the abundance of the evil. So be you all pious and fear Allah to avoid His punishment, you who are endowed with intellects, that possibly you would prosper.”
    101. O you who believe, do not ask the Prophet about things that would vex you; and in case you ask about them while the Qur’an is being sent down, they will be displayed to you. Allah has been clement towards them, and Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Forbearing.
    102. A people before you already asked about them. Thereafter when they were commanded to do them, they denied them and became disbelievers in them.
    103. Allah has not allowed you to make lawful that which He prohibited to you. So you are not allowed to split the camel’s ear and refrain from benefiting from it and call it bahirah; or to vow not to slaughter it and call it sa’ibah; or to prohibit eating the male goat and offer it to the idols, and when a she-goat gives birth to a male and a female, you call it wasilah and slaughter the female and exempt the male from slaughtering. Nor has He allowed you to prohibit benefiting from the male camel and call it ham. But the ones who have disbelieved fabricate a lie against Allah, and most of them do not consider.
    104. And when it is said to these disbelievers “come to what Allah has sent down and to the Messenger,” they say, “What we found our fathers doing is enough for us.” Is it proper to say that, even if their fathers did not know anything and were not guided?
    105. O you who believe, look after your own selves by obeying Allah. He who errs cannot harm you when you are rightly guided. To Allah will be the return of you all together, so He will fully inform you of whatever you were doing and requite you accordingly.  
    106. O you who believe, when any of you feels that death is impending and he wishes to make a bequest, then witnesses are mandatory. Two of your fellow Muslim men (related or unrelated to you) who are known to be just are summoned to witness the action in case you are on a journey and death approaches you. You shall detain them (both) after the prayer, then they shall swear by Allah—in case you are suspicious (of their truthfulness)—“We will not trade it for a price, even if it were for a near kinsman, nor will we keep back the testimony of Allah, for surely in that case we are sinful.” 
    107. Yet, in case it be discovered that both of them have lied in their witness or hidden something, then two others of those who claim a lawful right to the deceased person’s estate swear by Allah to the effect that their testimony is truer than that given by the other two men. They say, “We do not falsely accuse them (the first two witnesses) of perjury, nor do we give false evidence lest we would be wrongdoers.”
    108. So, this rule makes it likelier that they will bear proper testimony and keep their oaths; or they will fear that their oaths may prove false and that other oaths may be admitted. So, observe your oaths and your duties, and obey Allah and give ear to His rulings. And Allah does not guide the immoral people.
    109. And remember the Day of Resurrection when Allah will gather the messengers and ask them, “What answer were you given from the people to whom you were sent? Did they believe or deny?” Then (all nations will be brought to hear the witness of their messengers as) they say, “We have no knowledge; surely You are The Sublime Knower of the Unseen.”
    110. Then Allah will address `Isa son of Maryam: “Remember My favor upon you and upon your mother as I aided you with the spirit of holiness [Angel Jibril (Gabriel)] so that you spoke in the cradle to clear your mother of the accusations against her; and in your maturity to declare My revelation to you. Remember My favor upon you as I taught you the Book, and wisdom and the Tawrah (of Musa) and the Injil, which I sent down to you. Remember My favor upon you as I gave you immense miracles: You created out of clay the semblance of a bird, by My permission, then you blew into it, then it was a bird, by My permission. And you healed the one born blind and the leper, by My permission. And you brought forth the dead, by My permission. Remember My favor upon you as I restrained the Children of Isra'il from you as you came to them with the supreme evidence; then the ones among them who disbelieved said, ‘Decidedly this is nothing except evident sorcery.’”
    111. And remember what happened when I revealed to the Hawariyyin (the Disciples) to believe in Me and in My Messengers and they said, “We believe, and bear witness that, surely, we are sincere Muslims.”
    112. And remember, Messenger, what happened when the Hawariyyin said, “O `Isa son of Maryam, is your Lord able to send down upon us a table spread with food from the Heaven?” He said, “If you truly believe in Allah, then be pious and fear Him, and obey His commands.”
    113. They said, “We would like to eat of it so that our hearts be composed and we may know that you have spoken to us sincerely and that we may be among the witnesses thereof.”
    114. `Isa son of Maryam responded to them and said, “O Allah our Lord, send down upon us a table spread with food from the Heaven. That shall be a festival for the first of us and the last of us and a sign from You. And provide for us; You are The Most Charitable of providers.”
    115. Allah said, “Surely I am sending it down upon you. So then, surely, I will torment any of you who disbelieves after this with a torment such as I have not inflicted on anyone of the worlds [of jinn and men].”
    116. And remember, Prophet, what will happen on the Day of Resurrection when Allah says to `Isa, declaring the truth, “O `Isa son of Maryam, did you say to mankind, ‘Take me to yourselves and my mother as two gods, apart from Allah’?” He will say, “Sublime are You! In no way is it for me to say what I have no right to say. If I ever said it, then You already know it. You know whatever is within myself, and I do not know what is within Yourself. Surely, You are the Sublime Knower of the Unseen.
    117. “In no way did I say to them anything except whatever You commanded me: Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord. And I was a witness over them as long as I was among them. Then since (the time that) You took me up, You have been The Watcher over them, and You are Ever-Witnessing over everything.
    118. “If You torment them for what they did, then surely they are Your servants; and if You forgive them, then surely You are The Ever-Mighty, The Ever-Wise.”
    119. Allah said, “This is the Day the sincere ones will profit by their sincerity. For them are Gardens beneath which rivers flow; they will eternally abiding therein.” Allah is satisfied with them, and they are satisfied with Him. That is the magnificent triumph.
    120. To Allah belong the sovereignty and the supreme controlling power of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them. And He is Ever-Determiner over everything.

