SURAH 6
AL-AN AM
The Cattle
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah addresses the idolaters who disregarded all the available evidence in favor of a Supreme Being, Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, darkness and light. Charging the Messenger with falsehood is a reflection of the denial of Allah’s revelations and signs. The surah tells mankind that Allah has ascribed mercy unto Himself as an attribute. It tells people that He is the supreme controlling and influencing power inherent in all His creatures. The surah narrates the revelation imparted to Ibrahim (Abraham) to use against his people’s contention. People who open their eyes can clearly see Allah’s omnipotence featured in every process, biological and otherwise. The surah alludes to those generations who defied Allah, and their bitter fate. It tells people that Allah does not authorize superstitions, and He clearly indicates the forbidden. The People of the Book (Jews and Christians) are reproached for corrupting their Books and denying the Messenger’s mission. The surah treats many subjects and ends with a warning: Allah is swift in executing the law and in effecting just retribution. And He states the good news that He is also All-Forgiving and All-Merciful.
    
    1. Praise be to Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and made darkness and light. Yet the disbelievers make Him equal with creatures of their fancy.
    2. You people had better realize that it was He Who brought you into being and effected your special creation from clay. Then He ordained your span and the span of the universe and kept to Himself the knowledge of the time when all will come to an end and the Hereafter will begin. Yet you see, Muhammad, how they contend with opposing arguments about the resurrection!
    3. And He is Allah in the heavens and on earth, Who alone has the rightful claim to be revered and venerated in the act of worship and in the appropriate acts and rites. He is All-Knowing of all that you converse or whisper. Furthermore, He is All-Knowing of all the qualities, actions, and deeds that you earn.
    4. But they refuse to pay heed to revelations, signs, or events testifying to Allah’s omnipotence, and they veer away from them.
    5. They rejected the truth and turned a deaf ear to the Qur’an when it was presented to them to guide them to all truth. But soon they will realize the truth of all that has been treated in this Qur’an, which they ridicule.
    6. Have they not seen how many generations We have caused to perish—generations who came to this world before them, endowed with power and ability and with many qualities that total up to much more than those in you people. We poured down upon them rain and blessings, and We made the rivers run beneath their habitations. But in consequence of their ingratitude and arrogance, We destroyed them in requital of their transgression of the divine law. We replaced them with another generation.
    7. And if We sent down to you, Muhammad, a Book on sheets of paper fastened together, forming a material whole, and they felt it (by touch) with their hands, still the disbelievers would have labeled it evident magic.
    8. They insolently say, “If only an angel had been sent down to companion him (Muhammad)!” But if We had sent down an angel, then their punishment would have been instant and they would not have been respited.
    9. And if We had sent an angel as a messenger or to companion Our human messenger, We would have made him as a man, and their confusion would only be aggravated. 
    10. Nonetheless, messengers who were sent before you, Muhammad, were also ridiculed. The disbelievers mocked them. In consequence, the mockers were beset on all sides by ridicule.
    11. Say to them, “Journey through the land and open your eyes to see for yourselves the fatal consequences of their intentional assertion of falsehood.”
    12. Ask them, “To whom do you think whatever is in the heavens and the earth belong?” And say to them, “All belong to Allah, Who ascribed mercy unto Himself to give people a chance to repent before the undoubted Day of Resurrection when He will gather you all to His august presence. There and then the disbelievers who denied Him will realize that they are the great losers.”
    13. And to Him belong all created beings that rest during the darkness of the night as well as all created beings that rest during daylight. And He is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    14. Say to them, “Would I choose a patron other than Allah, Who has generated the heavens and the earth? He provides all with the requisites of life while He is provisioned by no one.” Say to them, “I have been commanded to be the first who submits to Islam and to never be one of those who associate other gods with Him.”
    15. Say to them, “I am fearful of Allah, my Lord. If I were to disobey Him, my requital will be an immense punishment on a momentous Day.
    16. “He who is averted punishment on that momentous Day will have won Allah’s mercy, and this is indeed supreme triumph.
    17. “If Allah afflicts you with a touch of an adversity, then no one can relieve you of it but Him. And if He should grace you with a touch of welfare, He is Ever-Determiner to effect everything.
    18. “He is The Supreme controlling and influencing Vanquisher over all His servants, and He is The All-Wise and The Ever-Cognizant of all things.”
    19. Ask, Muhammad, “What documentary evidence has more weight to support the truth of my mission than the attestation by Allah Himself? He is the Witness of my actions and of your actions. This Qur’an has been revealed to me to guide you to all truth and to warn you and all those whom it will reach against saying that there are other gods with Allah. I just will bear witness to that.” Say to them, “Indeed He is only One, and I am absolutely innocent of what you associate with Him.”
    20. Those who were recipients of Our Book (Jews and Christians)—the Tawrah and the Injil (Books revealed to Musa [Moses] and `Isa [Jesus], respectively)—do recognize this Book, the Qur’an, as well as the Messenger to whom it is sent. They recognize this reality as much as they are able to recognize their sons, but those who lost themselves refuse to believe the truth. 
    21. And who is more unjust than he who viciously attributes falsehood to Allah or denies His revelations and signs that testify to His omnipotence and authority? Surely, the unjust will not find prosperity in the Hereafter.
    22. The Day will come when We muster them all together and say to them:, “Where are your (presumed deities) that you associated with Allah?”
    23. Not knowing what to do with their contention, they will say, “By Allah our Lord, never did we associate other deities with Allah.”
    24. See how they lie about themselves and what they fabricated erred away from them.
    25. And among them are some who listen to the Qur’an when you recite it, not to profit by it. We have closed their hearts and deafened their ears. They just would not apprehend with their senses any revelation or any sign. And when they come to you, Muhammad, they do not humble themselves but are arrogantly more ready to argue than to obey. “This is nothing but myths of old!” they say. 
    26. And they incite people to reject the Qur’an and decline to accept it, and they themselves turn aside from it. They only bring irretrievable disaster upon themselves and they are unaware of this.
    27. If only you could see them when they are to face the Fire. Then they say, “Would that we were sent back to life and we would never deny Allah’s revelations and signs, and we would be among the believers.” 
    28. Now they realize their earlier sinful settled behavior, representing their hidden common feeling of the denial of the truth. And if they were sent back to life, they would resume the same evil practice they were commanded to avoid. They are indeed liars.
    29. They said, “There is only this present life, and we will never be resurrected.”
    30. And if you could see them when they are in the august presence of Allah their Lord, and He asks them, “Is this not the truth that was related to you by Our Messenger?” “By Allah our Lord, it is,” they say. There and then they will be told, “Taste the torment laid upon the damned for your intentional disbelief.”
    31. Losers indeed are those who deny resurrection and their meeting of Allah their Lord. And when all of a sudden the predetermined eventful Hour surprises them, they will say regretfully and with vain repentance, “It is a great pity to have neglected our duty to Allah in life.” They will be burdened with wrongs on their backs. Evil, indeed, is the fate of those who are burdened with their wrongs.
    32. Indeed, life here is but an illusion and a diversion; whereas, the abode in Heaven’s realm in the Hereafter is far better and blissful for those who revere Allah as He deserves. Can you people not keep away from disbelief?
    33. We do know, Muhammad, that what they say grieves you at heart. In fact, it is not you that they charge with falsehood, but it is Allah’s revelations, signs, and authority that the unjust deny. 
    34. Messengers before you, Muhammad, were charged with falsehood, and they put up with the charge until Allah brought them victory. Decisions pronounced by Allah are decisive, irrevocable, and conclusive. You have already been given the tidings of the messengers who preceded you.
    35. If their natural aversions and antipathies perturb you, and you are able to seek a roadway underground or set up a ladder to ascend heavenward to bring about a sign to convince them of the truth of your mission (then do it). If Allah had willed, He would have united them to obey Him and seek His guidance. Therefore, do not be one of those ignorant of Allah’s knowledge.
    36. It is only those who hear that favorably respond to Heaven’s call; whereas those who are dead will (only hear when they) return back to Him.
    37. And the disbelievers say, “If only a convincing divine sign form his Lord were sent down on him!” Say to them, Muhammad, “Allah is All-Powerful enough to send down any sign, but most of them do not know the truth.”
    38. There is not a beast in the animal kingdom on earth nor a bird moving through the air with its wings that does not form distinct nations like you people. We have not left out anything but have included it in this Book, and all will be mustered before Allah their Lord.
    39. Those who denied Our revelations and signs betokening omnipotence and authority, Muhammad, are indeed deaf and dumb; they are shriveled into darkness. But Allah misguides those whom He wills and guides to His straight path whom He wills.
    40. Say to them, “What if Allah afflicts you with a penalty in requital of your evil deeds, or your Hereafter be planted in the present? Who is there besides Allah to invoke for mercy, if, indeed, you are sincere?
    41. “Indeed, it is only Allah Whom you will inevitably invoke to relieve your misery if He wills, and you will forget your false deities whom you associate with Him.”
    42. We have sent Messengers before you, Muhammad, to peoples who came to this world before your people, and We afflicted them with misfortunes and calamities so that they would supplicate Allah.
    43. If only they had supplicated as Our violence came to them! But they became hardhearted and were fooled by Satan, who allured them to brighter worlds as a reward for their doings.
    44. And when they forgot all the knowledge that We had imparted to them, We opened for them all the great channels of prosperity. So, when there and then We suddenly took them, they simply gave up hope and were dumbfounded.
    45. There, the people who were unjust were uprooted from the earth. And praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.
    46. Ask them, Muhammad, “What if Allah takes away your hearing and your sight and seals up your hearts? Who is that deity, other than Allah, who is able to restore them to you?” See, Muhammad, how We expound Our revelations, yet they turn aside.
    47. Ask them, “What if Allah’s punishment comes suddenly or openly? Who but the unjust will perish?”
    48. We only send the messengers as bearers of good tidings and as warners, and those who believe and act righteously will have won Allah’s mercy; no fear will fall upon them nor will they grieve.
    49. But those who refuse to recognize Our revelations and signs betokening omnipotence and authority will suffer the torment for those who are immoral.
    50. Say to your people, Muhammad, “I do not claim to possess the treasuries of Allah, nor do I claim to foretell the Unseen, nor do I say to you that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me of truth.” And ask them, “Will they be esteemed alike, those who are blind and the ever-beholding? Can you people not meditate?”
    51. And use the Qur’an, Muhammad, to warn those who are apprehensive of the inevitable occasion when they are mustered before Allah their Lord, besides Whom they have no protector or intercessor, that they may be pious.
    52. And do not dismiss those who are humble in rank or station before they listen to your discourse on Islam. They invoke Allah morning and evening seeking only the illumination proceeding from Him. You, Muhammad, are not accountable to Allah for their deeds or actions, nor are they accountable to Allah for your deeds or actions to induce you to dismiss them and be among the unjust.
    53. We gathered them together to try them and expose the inclination of some of them against the others. And there, the arrogant said contemptuously, “Is it these whom Allah has graced among us?” Does Allah not know best the thankful?
    54. And when those who believe in Our revelations and signs come to you, Muhammad, address them with the expression of “peace be upon you” and proclaim to them, “Allah ascribed mercy unto Himself as an attribute to the end that any among you who commits himself to evil conduct and repents thereafter, and henceforth imprints his deeds with piety will find Allah Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.” 
    55. Thus do We expound Our revelations so as to make evident the way of the criminals.
    56. Say to them, Muhammad, “I have been forbidden to worship those deities whom you invoke in prayer or appeal to for aid and protection apart from Allah.” And say to them, “I never follow your prejudices, or then I will have missed the path of righteousness and failed to be one of those who are rightly guided.”
    57. Say to them, Muhammad, “I follow the law I received from Allah my Lord, the Law—the Qur’an—that you have totally denied. I do not have control (over Allah’s punishment), which you impertinently urge to be hastened.” Decisions are only with Allah; He declares the truth and He is infinitely the best of all verdict givers.
    58. Say to them, “If the punishment you have asked to be hastened on rested with me, the case as put by both of us would have been decided, and Allah knows best the unjust ones.”
    59. And with Him are the keys of the Unseen; none knows them except He. He has all knowledge of all that is on the land and in the sea. There is not one single leaf, large or small, but it is within His knowledge. Nor is there a seed embedded in the darkness of the earth nor anything wet or dry, but it is (inscribed) in a Book.
    60. And it is He Who takes you up at night during sleep and knows fully well all that you have indulged in by day, a process continuing up to a predetermined time. Then you will all return back to Him; thereafter He informs you of all that you were doing.
    61. He is The Supreme Vanquisher over His servants, and He sends down guardian angels until it is time for any of you to encounter death as predetermined by Allah. Then Our messengers [angels] take him up and they are never negligent.
    62. There and then they are sent back to Allah, their True Patron. Is the right to judge not asserted as Allah’s own? He is the swiftest in executing the law of reckoning.
    63. Ask them, Muhammad, “Who saves you from the darkness of land and of sea? You invoke Him with supplication and in secret, ‘If He extends His mercy to us and saves us, we would be among the thankful.’”
    64. And say to them, “Allah is He Who saves you from these dangerous situations and from every agony. Yet still you associate other deities with Him.”
    65. Say to them, “He is The All-Powerful Who is able to drive against you a retributive torment from above you or from beneath your feet, or to confound you in sects and make some of you inflict violence on others.” See, Muhammad, how We expound and orient Our revelations that they may comprehend!
    66. Yet your people still deny the Qur’an, and it is the truth. Say to them, “I am not entrusted over your.”
    67. To every announcement or proclamation embodied in the Qur’an there is a fixed point of time and place. And then you people will know of it when it comes to pass.
    68. And when you see those critical of Our revelations, just avoid them and do not keep company with them until they have changed the subject. Should Satan make you forget, then sit no longer with the unjust people after Our reminder.
    69. Those who revere Allah as He deserves are in no way accountable to Allah for the deeds or actions of the wrongful. However, it is a reminder that they may be pious.
    70. And leave out, Muhammad, those who treat their religion as a plaything and an amusement. They are deluded by the present life. But remind them of the truth so that it may save them from destruction for what they have committed, as they do not have any patron or intercessor apart from Allah. Nor will humble intercession be accepted from any on behalf of another, nor will the equivalent in ransom pay for the expiation of the guilt of one or the other. These persons will be requited with what is commensurate with their deeds. Their uneasy and painful sensation of thirst will only be quenched with boiling water, and they will suffer the painful torment laid on them for that they were disbelieving.
    71. Say to them, Muhammad, “Is it befitting to invoke besides Allah what cannot help us or harm us, and to revert to disbelief after being guided by Allah? If so, we would be like someone who has been fooled by the devils, who wanders over the earth perplexed! So, he hardly hears the call of his good and pious friends begging him to come back to guidance from Allah.” Say to them, “Guidance is only from Allah, and we Muslims have been commanded to surrender to the will of Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”
    72. And we have been commanded to engage in the act of prayer and revere Allah as He deserves, for to Him we will all be mustered.
    73. It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in truth. The instant He says to an object or to an event “be” it is there. His Word is the truth and to Him belongs absolute kingdom when the trumpet is blown to indicate the Resurrection and Judgment. He is The All-Knowing of the Unseen, The All-Knowing of the witnessed. He is All-Wise, the Ever-Cognizant.
    74. Once Ibrahim (Abraham) asked his father Azar (Athar), “Do you take idols made of stone or wood as godheads? O my father, I do see you and your people lost in evident error.”
    75. Thus did We show Ibrahim the dominion behind the magnificent powers and laws of the physical universe to affirm his certitude.
    76. When the night darkened the world, he saw a planet. “This,” he said, “is my Lord.” But when it set, he said, “I do not love things that set.”
    77. Then when he saw the moon rising into view, he said, “This is my Lord.” But again when it set, he said, “Unless my Lord guides me, I will certainly be lost in error.”	
    78. When he saw the sun emerging, he said, “This is my Lord. It is greater.” But when it set, he said, “O my people, I am indeed innocent of all that you associate with Allah.
    79. “Now do I turn my face to Him, the Eternal Allah, Creator of the heavens and the earth, and I am not one of those associating other deities with Him.”
    80. His people contended with him (with opposing arguments against the thought of one Allah). But he said to them, “Do you contend with me with opposing arguments against Allah Who has guided me to His path of righteousness? I do not fear those deities whom you associate with Him, nor will I be in harm unless it be Allah’s will. Allah my Lord is All-Powerful, and His knowledge embraces everything. Can you not remind yourselves?
    81. “And how should I fear those deities whom you associate with Him and you do not fear the consequences of associating with Him other deities whom He never authorized? Which of the two groups would then be safe and secure, if only you knew?”	
    82. Indeed, those who believed in Allah and did not confuse their belief with injustice are they who will be secure, and Providence will be their guide.
    83. That was the reasoning We imparted to Ibrahim to use against his people’s contention. We raise whom We will to higher degrees and power.  Allah your Lord is indeed All-Wise and All-Knowing.
    84. We bestowed upon him Ishaq (Isaac) and Ya`qub (Jacob), each of whom We guided to truth just as We had guided Nuh (Noah) before that. And of Ibrahim’s offspring are Dawud (David), Sulayman (Solomon), Ayyub (Job), Yusuf (Joseph), Musa (Moses), and Harun (Aaron). Thus do We reward the fair-doers.
    85. And Zakariyya (Zachariah) and Yahya (John), `Isa (Jesus), and Ilyas (Elias), each and all were enrolled among the righteous.
    86. And Isma`il (Ishmael) and Ilyasa`a, Yunus (Jonah) and Lut (Lot), each and all We favored over all mankind.
    87. And of their forefathers, their offsprings, and their brethren, We chose them and We guided them to a straight path.
    88. This is the true guidance of Allah, a guidance of whom He wills of His servants to all truth. Had they associated other deities with Him, they would have been frustrated and their deeds to worthlessness.
    89. Those Prophets are they to whom We entrusted the Book, the judgment, and the prophethood. If these people [Makkans] disbelieve in these divinely given advantages, other non-disbelievers have been entrusted with them (they fulfilled the requirements and proved worthy of the trust). 
    90. Those have been guided by Allah. Therefore, take them, Muhammad, as a guide and follow their example. And say to your people, “I do not charge you a reward for imparting to you Allah’s revelations. The Qur’an is simply the Reminding fountainhead of all truth to the worlds.”
    91. And they [the Makkan pagans and the Jews] did not credit Allah with the attributes asserted as His own, as they said, “Never did Allah disclose divine knowledge to a human being.” Ask them, “Who, then, sent down the Book that you knew Musa (Moses) presented to his people as a light and guidance to mankind—the Book that you (the Jews) divided and again broke up into subdivisions and published the parts they planned to disclose and concealed many parts, the Book that imparted to them divine knowledge that neither they nor their fathers had ever known? Is it not Allah?” Let them, Muhammad, drown themselves in their vain discourse.
    92. And this Qur’an, like the Injil, is a Heaven-sent blessed Book. It corroborates and authoritatively validates the authentic Books revealed beforehand so that you, Muhammad, might warn the people of the Mother of Cities and the people of all cities around. Those who acknowledge the truth of the Hereafter believe in this Book and regularly observe their prayer.
    93. And who is more unjust than he who attributes falsehood to Allah or claims that he has been given revelation by Allah when, in fact, nothing whatsoever has been revealed to him? And who is more wicked than he who says, “I shall send down a book like that sent down by Allah”? If only you, Muhammad, could see the unjust at the distressful moment of death when they are in agony, as the angels of death put forward their hands to them and say to them, “Now get yourselves out (of torment). Today you will suffer the humiliating torment laid upon the damned for attributing to Him other than the truth and for objecting to His signs with inordinate pride.”
    94. “Now,” they are told, “you have come back to Us singly, as you were alone when We created you at first, and stripped of all possessions and of all that We had ascribed to you in life. Nor do We see you accompanied by your intercessors whom you had claimed as associates with Me. Now the ties of your common fanciful belief are being severed, and those whom you presumed to be gods have proved your assumptions wrong.”
    95. Surely, Allah is the Splitter of the seeds and the date stones. He causes the living to emerge from the dead and the dead to emerge from the living. That is Allah. Then how are you diverged (into falsehood)?
    96. He is the Splitter of the daybreak, and He has designated the night as the period of natural repose, and the sun and the moon for determining and computing time. Such is the plan determined by The All-Mighty, The All-Knowing.
    97. And it is He Who designated the stars as guideposts for you amid the darkness of night on land and sea. We have expounded Our signs to people who know.
    98. And He it is Who brought you into being from one single self—Adam—and Adam was originated from the earth, so the earth is your destined habitation where you live and your habitation after death. We have expounded Our signs to people who comprehend.
    99. And it is He Who sends down rainwater from the sky and with it He brings forth buds of every kind. And He brings forth the green blades from which come the thickly clustered grains. And from the date palm spring readily accessible pendant bunches of dates. And with the water We cause vineyards of grapes to grow, and fruit trees, olives and pomegranates. Some of them are similar in shape but different in taste, smell, and benefit. Look at their produce when they have produced and their mellowness. These are clear and convincing signs to people who believe. 
    100. Yet the disbelievers associate with Him the jinn as partners of omnipotence and authority albeit He created them. And without knowledge they insolently ascribe to Him sons and daughters. Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely far beyond all they that falsely attribute to Him.
    101. And it is He Who originated the heavens and the earth. How would He have a child, as they claim, when He is infinitely above taking a female companion! He created all, including those whom they took as deities. And He is The All-Knowing of everything and will requite them according to their deeds.
    102. Such is Allah your Lord; there is no god but Him, the Creator Who originated all. Therefore, worship Him, and worship Him alone. He is the Trustee and Guardian of everything, and everything will be brought back to Him.
    103. He cannot be apprehended by sight, but He comprehends all that is displayed to the bodily eye. And He is The Gracious Who gives His servants understanding, and He is The Ever-Kind Who realizes everything, and The Ever-Cognizant Who is aware of everything.
    104. Say to them, Muhammad, “You people have now received from your Lord divine evidence and signs in the Qur’an that enlighten the way to the truth for you. Therefore, he who sees will benefit himself, and he who blinds himself to the truth will hurt himself. And you must realize that I am not here a preserver over you (I am only a Messenger who conveys to you what has been sent down to me).”
    105. Through this unique variation of presenting the cosmic signs, We explicitly present Our signs in the Qur’an. We aim to make them clear and compelling to the disbelievers so that they may not find any excuse for accusing you of being taught by some of them rather than by Allah. We also mean to give insight to those who know.
    106. Follow all that has been revealed to you, Muhammad, from Allah Your Lord. There is no god but Him (who is worth worshiping, obeying, and submitting to). And disregard those who associate other deities with Him.
    107. If Allah had willed, He would have forced them with His power to worship Him alone. And rest assured that We did not send you a preserver over them, nor are you a trustee over them.
    108. O you who believe, do not assail the idols they worship besides Allah with abusive language, lest they should revile Allah in retaliation without knowledge. Thus every nation was allured to its deeds, exactly as these were allured to loving their idols. Then all nations will be brought back to Allah their Lord, and He will inform them of all they were doing.
    109. The disbelievers swear by Allah that if any of the signs they asked for were revealed to them, they would most certainly believe in Allah and His Messenger. Say to them, Prophet, “Revelations and signs rest in the hands of Allah alone. Nonetheless, you Muslims do not know what I know—that the disbelievers will not believe in the miraculous signs if they come.”
    110. Nor do you know that We divert their hearts when they receive the revelation and their sight so that they lose sight of the truth as they did at the beginning and will do henceforth. And We leave them in their inordinate blundering.
    111. Those who solemnly declared that they would believe in any of the miracles they asked for, if they came true, are liars. If We had sent down angels whom they could see, and resurrected the dead to speak with them, and gathered before their eyes beings, matters, and affairs, they would not have believed the truth nor would they have conformed to Islam unless it be the will of Allah. But most of them are ignorant.
    112. Just as these took you as an enemy and obstinately opposed you while you sought to guide them to the right path, so did We appoint to every prophet enemies with satanic attributes, from both mankind and jinn, revealing to one another fair speech in order to deceive. If Allah had willed, they would never have done so. But Allah meant to test them; therefore let them sink under the vexations they thoughtlessly fabricate.
    113. Such deceit attracts the victims of deception who deny the truth of the Hereafter and allow themselves to be deluded. They accept such deceitful talk and listen to such deceitful advice as these devils sway them to give, and commit what impels them to their misdeeds.
    114. Say to them, Prophet, “Thus is Allah’s verdict made clear by the evident signs, so, how shall I choose a judge besides Allah when it is He Who makes and gives the law? It is He Who has sent down the Qur’an, distinctly expressing all that is meant leaving nothing merely implied.” The People of the Book know it is Allah’s revealed Book in all truth from your Lord. Therefore, you Muslims, be not one of those who hide the truth and contend it.
    115. Allah’s Word has been issued, and He has perfected His truth by sending down the Ever-Glorious Book that distinguishes right from wrong. Nothing can change His words, and He hears all that you say and knows all that you do.
    116. And as Allah is the Just Judge Whose Books are the source of justice, then do not listen to most people on earth. If you do, most of them will take you away from Allah’s way and lead you to the wrong. They only follow lies and what their thoughts impel them to. They simply rely on baseless guessing. 
    117. Allah your Lord knows best who intentionally or unintentionally strays from His path of righteousness and strays from His purpose, just as He knows who relentlessly adheres to the path of righteousness.
    118. And if Allah alone knows the righteous and the perverts, then do not listen to those who deny Allah and prohibit some animals. Eat of them. Allah has provided them to you and made them lawful to you, so eat of them and mention Allah’s name when you slaughter them if, indeed, you have believed in His revelations and signs of His authority.
    119. There is no reason why you should not eat the flesh of the permitted animals that are slaughtered in the name of Allah when He has designated to you what is forbidden if you are not under compelling circumstances! Indeed, many willingly lead themselves to wrong based on their prejudices, such as those Arabs who forbade some animals. You are not transgressors if you eat of them; it is they who transgressed when they forbade them. But Allah knows well those who disregard His commandments and transgress the limits He prescribed.
    120. Piety does not mean to forbid what Allah has made lawful. Piety is to avoid the immoral and the sinful, whether it be committed openly or secretly. Indeed, those who are wrongdoers will be requited with what is commensurate with their evil deeds.
    121. Permitted animals are made lawful to you through slaughtering. Therefore, do not eat the flesh of the permitted animal that has not been slaughtered in the name of Allah or that has been slaughtered in the name of a deity other than Allah; this is impiety. The devils suggest baseless opposing arguments to your contenders to make lawful what Allah has prohibited. And if you should yield to their temptation, you will have reverted to being associators. 
    122. You believers are not like the disbelievers. He who was dead and was given life and light by Allah to conduct himself well among the people with Allah as his guide, does not compare with him who is led into the darkness, into deepest dismay where there is no escape! Thus were the disbelievers deluded with attractions so that they wasted their days in vain. 
    123. Do not wonder, Prophet, if you see that the principal criminals in every town set no bounds to their vain sensual and evil desires, taking cunning for wisdom and lying in wait to deceive the people. This happens in every big town when, in fact, they beset themselves with evils and malice, but they fail to perceive. 
    124. They envy the people when a revelation or a sign comes to them from Allah, and they say, “We will not believe until we are given the like of what the messengers of Allah were given.” Indeed, Allah knows best whom to entrust with His divine message. But those who grow daily more and more wicked will be humiliated in Heaven’s realm and imprisoned in Hell in requital of their plotting. 
    125. It is only by Allah’s will that they went astray and you were guided. When Allah wills to guide someone to His path of righteousness, He comforts him and makes his breast amenable and responsive to the joyful thought of conforming to Islam. But when Allah decides to leave someone to his evil thoughts, He tightens his breast so that it is impervious to knowledge—a feeling similar to what he would experience if he climbed in heaven. Thus does Allah afflict those who deny Him with the abomination laid on those who do not believe.
    126. This is Allah’s path, a path of piety, righteousness, and virtue! We have expounded it to the people. No one will benefit from it but those who seek guidance from Allah and remember Him. 
    127. For those believers there will be an abode in Heaven’s realm in a world of peace in the august presence of Allah their Lord, Who will overshadow them by His gracious wing in return for their good deeds. 
    128. If those who followed Allah’s path will have an abode in Heaven’s realm, then those who followed Satan’s path will face a horrible end when Allah musters them all on the Day of Resurrection. He will say to them, “O people of the jinn, you seduced many among mankind and led them astray.” Their allies among mankind will say, “O Allah our Lord, we enjoyed one another and profited one another until our predetermined time was fulfilled.” Then Allah will say, “Hell is where you will abide in eternal suffering, except whom Allah wills to save due to their acceptance of Allah’s message. Allah your Lord is indeed All-Wise, All-Knowing.” 
    129. As We made them enjoy and profit one another, so We induce those who confirm themselves in malice to take each other as friends and guardians by reason of their common attributes and their striving to drive people away from Allah’s path. 
    130. On the Day of Judgment, Allah will address them: “O people of the jinn and mankind, did you not receive messengers of your own people to present you with My signs and narrate to you My revelations evincing both My omnipotence and authority and to warn you of this momentous Day? So how can you lie to Me?” “We bear witness against ourselves,” they say. They were deceived by the sensual enjoyment that they regarded as the chief object of life, and they were witnesses of their own actions and of their disobedience to Allah. 
    131. Therefore, never would Allah your Lord do away  unjustly with the towns when their inhabitants were unconscious of the wrong they were accustomed to doing. 
    132. There are grades (ranks) for all according to their deeds, good or bad. And Allah your Lord is not unaware of what people do (There is no minor or major deed but it is recorded). 
    133. Allah your Lord is The Independent, The Absolute, and The Source of mercy; therefore, He enjoins good and forbids evil. If He wills, He can do away with you people and replace you with others of His choice, just as He brought you into being from the posterity of other people (after whom you inherited the land).
    134. The punishment you have been warned against, and the rewards you have been promised to get after resurrection, assembling, and requital will come to pass at the predetermined time, and you will not be able to avert what will befall you or what is threatened.
    135. Say to them, Prophet, “O people, you may pursue your way, but I am steering my course of action towards implementing the truth. And you certainly will come to know who will win Allah’s mercy hereafter and who will succeed in attaining the blissful and happy end. You are the unjust wrongdoers, and the wrongdoers will never prosper.”
    136. The idolaters are in constant delusion. They apportion to Allah a share of the crops and cattle that He Himself has created and spend it on the strangers and the needy, and another share they apportion to their idols that they take as deities besides Allah. And what they apportion to their partners [to Allah] reaches them in full; whereas what is apportioned to Allah is hardly spent in what it was assigned to. Evil indeed is what they do.
    137. As they were deluded by their unjust portioning of Allah’s creation, so were they deluded by their idols that they claimed to be Allah’s partners, to kill their children and to vow killing their children as sacrifices to their idols. Such illusions confused them and perplexed the essence of religion in their views so that they could not understand the essence of religion. Had Allah willed, they would not have indulged in such an evil practice. Therefore, Muhammad, let them sink under their vexations, and Allah will requite them in proportion to their deeds.
    138. They classified cattle and crops into (a) those presumed sacred and therefore forbidden as food to all except those whom they qualify; (b) cattle forbidden to bear burdens; and (c) cattle slaughtered for food without invoking the name of Allah. All along, they forged lies against Allah, but He will requite them for their falsehood.
    139. They also say, “What these cattle carry in their wombs are reserved exclusively for our males and forbidden to our spouses, unless the offspring be stillborn; then both sexes go shares.” Allah will requite them for this discrimination that they falsely claim is a divine ordinance. He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
    140. Losers indeed are those who foolishly and irreligiously committed infanticide, a thoughtless evil. Who forbade them their provision, forging lies against Allah? They have, indeed, erred and strayed from the path of righteousness.
    141. He it is Who brought into being orchards, some trellised and others not trellised. He brought into being the palm trees and all of the agricultural yield of every district and season, varying in kind and in flavor, and the olives and the pomegranates, besides many others of similar kind and dissimilar taste. Eat, therefore, of their fruits and when you harvest, pay what ought to be given in charity or zakah, but avoid prodigality, for Allah does not like the extravagant.
    142. And He gave you cattle, some to carry your burdens and provide you with commodities, and others for meat. Therefore, eat of what Allah has provided you and do not follow the footsteps of Satan. He is indeed your avowed enemy.
    143. Of each kind of cattle Allah created a male and a female, so they are eight, two pairs of sheep, and two pairs of goats. Ask them, Muhammad, “Has He prohibited the two males or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Tell me with knowledge if you speak the truth.”
    144. Allah has also created two pairs of camels and two pairs of cows. Ask them, “Has He prohibited the two males or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Were you witnesses when Allah gave such an order (as you claim) and you attest to it? Who, then, is more unjust than one who viciously leads people without knowledge into error and lies against Allah? Indeed, Allah does not guide the vicious and wrongdoers to His path of righteousness.” 
    145. Say to them, Muhammad, “I do not find among the divine commands revealed to me anything prohibiting a food consumed by mankind except a permitted animal found dead or slaughtered without invoking Allah’s name on it; blood streaming from an animal; the flesh of swine. This is impure, harmful, and unclean food. Also forbidden is the permitted animal slaughtered in the name of other than Allah. But if one is in compelling circumstances and does not wish to transgress, Allah will allow one to eat the necessary bit to keep one’s life. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    146. This is what We forbade to you. And to the Jews We forbade every animal with undivided hoof and We forbade them the fat of the oxen and sheep except the fat covering their backs and their entrails and the fat attached to the bones. This prohibition was imposed on them in requital of their vice and corruption. This is the truth We justly declare.
    147. If they disbelieve what We revealed to you, Muhammad, then say to them, “Surely, Allah, Your Lord—Whom alone you must believe in and adhere to His orders—has a vast mercy (for him who obeyed Him and to him who disobeyed Him, as well). It is extended to all, especially to those who repent. But they must not be deceived by this mercy because His violence will not be turned back from the criminal people.”
    148. And to excuse their unjustifiable disbelief and forbidding what Allah has made lawful, the associators will insolently say, “Had Allah not willed, neither our fathers nor we would have associated other deities with Him, nor would we have prohibited anything.” Thus much did their predecessors charge their messengers with falsehood until they tasted the fatal consequences of their evil conduct in life. Say to them, Muhammad, “Do you have evidence to prove that Allah approved of your disbelief? You only follow the lies and the prompting of surmise and conjecture.”
    149. Say to them, Prophet, “Allah has the crucial evidence that you lied when you claimed that your disbelief and prohibiting the lawful were by His will. If He had willed, He would have guided you all to His path of righteousness.”
    150. Say to them, Prophet, “Bring your witnesses who can testify that Allah has forbidden all that you presume He has.” And if they should bear witness to this effect, then do not believe their testimony; they are lying. Nor act upon their prejudices or the prejudices of those denying Our revelations and signs and the truth of the Hereafter, who make Allah equal to other creatures, associating them with Him.
    151. Say to them, Prophet, “Come, I will tell you all that Allah has forbidden so that you do your best to keep away from them: You must not in any way associate other deities with Him nor be undutiful to your parents, but commit them to your kind care. You must not kill your children because of lack of means; We provide for you and them. You must not commit adultery, openly or secretly and other obscenities. You must not deprive anyone of life, which Allah has made prohibited, unless it is justified for a proven crime. These are injunctions enjoined by Allah, and you are expected to submit to Allah’s authority and reflect.
    152. “You must not encroach upon the property of the orphan, unless it be with the motive of improving it, until he or she reaches maturity and is able to take charge of it. You must not fraudulently scant the measure and the weight but dispense them equitably to the full. No self is charged with more than it can bear. When you give witness or pronounce a judgment or tell news, stick to justice and equity, even if the person in question is related. Do not break your promise or vow relating to lawful matters between you and Allah or between you and others, but let your actions accord with your words, and fulfil the solemn promise and keep the vow. These are injunctions Allah has enjoined, and you are expected to remember and to submit to Allah’s commands.
    153. “Never turn away from the path I chose for you, as it is the straight path that leads to happiness in this life and in the Hereafter. So follow it and never follow the other paths that Allah forbade to you, so that you may not break up into groups and parties and stray from Allah’s straight path. This is what He has commanded you so that you may be pious to Him as He deserves.”
    154. We gave Musa (Moses) the Book (the Tawrah) to complete Our favor on those who had obeyed Allah and conformed their will to His. It was well expounded to interpret all matters and guide people to all truth, and a mercy from Allah to His creatures so that they might realize that they will be gathered before Him at the predetermined time.
    155. And this Qur’an is a Book We sent down as a blessing comprising divine favor and all the benefits of this world and the world to come. Therefore, follow its precepts and obey Allah as He deserves so that you may be recipients of His mercy.
    156. We have sent it down so that you people do not say, “The Books sent down to the people of the Tawrah and to those of the Injil and we have been heedless of their study.”
    157. We sent it down lest you should say, “Had we received the revelation that was sent to them, we would have reverenced and venerated it more.” Now you have no excuse for your disobedience; the Qur’an has come to you as convincing evidence attesting to the truthfulness of Our Messenger’s mission (clarifying all that you need in your life, and guiding you to the straight path). Therefore, who is more wicked than one who belies Allah’s revelations and signs and turns aside from Allah’s disclosure of divine knowledge? Indeed, those who turn aside from Our revelations and signs betokening omnipotence and authority will be put to the torment laid upon the damned in requital of closing their hearts and ears. 
    158. The indispensability of faith has been proved by evidence, yet these people did not believe. What are they waiting for? Do they intend to wait until the angels come to them as messengers instead of men, or as witnesses to the truthfulness of your message? Or until Allah your Lord comes to them Himself to give witness that your message is true? Or to see some of His signs evincing both His omnipotence and the truth of your mission? But when such overwhelming signs present themselves, no self that neither surrendered itself earlier to Allah’s authority nor accomplished a useful purpose in virtue of its faith will profit of its submission now. Say to them, “Await any of these things you are aspiring to, and keep on denying Allah’s signs, and we will wait with you.”
    159. Indeed, those who divided their religion and separated it into sects by false beliefs and forged laws and set themselves at variance—you are not responsible for the way they conduct themselves in life. You are only responsible for conveying the message to them. And their account rests with Allah, Who will inform them on the Day of Judgment of all they used to do.
    160. He who performs a good deed will be rewarded with ten times the like of it, and he who performs an evil deed will be requited with the like of it, and no one will ever be done any injustice.
    161. Say to them, Muhammad, “Allah my Lord has guided me to the path of glory, the path of righteousness, the path on which was founded the religion of Ibrahim (Abraham), who never associated other deities with Allah.”
    162. Say to them, “Indeed, my prayers and all my acts of worship and all the duties I fulfil in my life are done in the debt to Allah, my Lord and Creator of the universe.
    163. “No partners does He have, nor does He have anyone associated with Him. To this fundamental truth I have been enjoined to adhere, and I am the first who have conformed to Islam.”
    164. Say, Muhammad, rejecting the disbelievers’ call to you to conform to their disbelief: “Shall I choose a god other than Allah the Lord, Who is the Creator and Lord of everything?” And say to them that they will not bear your sins for you if you agree with them. No self, whether it bears wrongs or not, will bear the wrongs of another. You will be brought back to Allah your Lord; you are all destined to go. Then He will tell you in what you differed and requite you according to your deeds, so, how can I disobey Allah and believe your false promises?
    165. He it is Who has established you on earth and made one generation replace the other, and He promoted and exalted—in rank, honor, estimation, development, power, and wealth—some above others and arranged you in grades to test your qualities with what He has ordained for you. You had better realize that Allah your Lord is swift indeed in executing the law and in effecting just retribution. And He is also Oft-Forgiving, Ever--Merciful.

