SURAH 7
AL-A RAF
The Heights
Revealed at Makkah
    In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The beginning of this surah is a continuation of the end of Surat Al-An`am. Then this surah includes the start of humanity, so it mentions the story of the creation of Adam and Hawwa’ (Eve) and their exit from Paradise by Satan’s whispers. The surah also shows some of Satan’s continual whispering to man concerning attire and food. Then the verses, like other verses of the Qur’an, deal with contemplating the heavens and the earth and the wonderful system they contain.
    The surah mentions the stories of the Prophets Nuh (Noah); Hud with his nation, the `Ad; Salih with his nation, the Thamud, who were endowed with strength and riches; Lut (Lot) with his nation and the evil acts they dared to commit; and Shu`ayb and the people of Madyan. The surah then includes the truthful narratives with the lesson they contain. Allah then narrates the story of Musa (Moses) and what Pharaoh did.
    The surah concludes by describing one who is given guidance but then leaves it by Satan’s misguidance and how such a person acts. The surah finally expounds the call to the truth, which Muhammad came with.
    
    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). S (sad). These letters occur at the beginning of some Makkan surahs to draw the attention of the polytheists to the fact that the Qur’an, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. The Qur’an is revealed to you, Muhammad, so that you may warn the disbelievers to become believers, and remind the believers to become stronger in belief. Therefore, let it not oppress your thoughts and feelings, but use it and act upon it to warn those who deny the truth and to put those who have conformed to Islam in mind of their duties.
    3. And you people, act in accordance with all that has been revealed to you from Allah your Lord and take not besides Allah guardians to whom you respond and whose help you seek. They will influence you to revert from Allah’s religion. How little you people remember Allah.
    4. How many towns did We caused to perish in requital of their worshiping other than Allah. Great was Our indignation against them so that it spoke thunder on some (Lut’s people) at night while they slept and on others (Shu`aib’s people) during their siesta.
    5. When Our anger was displayed in action, they said nothing with regrets and vain repentance but “We were unjust.”
    6. Indeed, We will call to account all those to whom messengers were sent; they will have much to answer for, and We will question the messengers whom We had sent.
    7. There and then We will narrate to them with full knowledge of those who excelled and of those who failed so that they realize that We were never absent but All-Knowing.
    8. The balance of justice on this Momentous Day is truth manifest. He whose deeds of piety surpass (his iniquities) in weight will be protected from the Fire and will prosper in Paradise.
    9. And he whose iniquities surpass (his good deeds) in weight will be a loser because of their iniquities and unjust treatment of Our revelations and signs.
    10. We have firmly established you people on earth and endowed you with the means of living, and with conditions capable of being turned to use, yet how little you are thankful (for which ingratitude you will be punished).
    11. And We brought you into being by a special creation, and We fashioned you and gave you form and countenance (and made you a determinate exalted being). Then We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves to Adam—your archetype—.” And the angels prostrated in comely order, praise, and adoration, except Iblis, who refused.
    12. Then Allah asked, “What prompted you, Satan, not to prostrate to Adam when I commanded you to do so?” “But I am of a better sort than he is,” said Satan. “You created me from fire; whereas You created him from clay.”
    13. “Then down you go,” Allah said, “from this blissful state. You are doomed to a lower state. You are here in Heaven’s realm in the august presence where you cannot display arrogance or exhibit an overweening opinion of your quality. You are dismissed from My Heaven’s realm, doomed to the vicissitudes of deposition and degradation.”
    14. “Give me respite,” said Satan, “till the day they are resurrected.”
    15. Allah said, “You are granted, like those with characteristics befitting you, a delay of punishment till the predetermined Eventful Hour.”
    16. Then said Satan, “Since You have dismissed me and sent me astray, I will lie in ambush in Your path of righteousness and seduce as many of mankind as I can decoy from there by any possible means.
    17. “And I will assail them from every side; I will leap at them from front and from behind, from their right and from their left, and You will find most of them not feeling or displaying gratitude.”
    18. “Go away from here,” Allah said, “reproved and rejected. I will fill the realms of Hell with you and with all those of mankind who take you as a guide.”
    19. “As for you, Adam,” Allah said, “you and your wife make abode in Paradise and enjoy all that affords pleasure. Eat any food you will, but avoid this particular tree; do not draw near it lest you both be unjust wrongdoers.”
    20. And there Satan furtively whispered them, instigating evil to them. He suggested secretly to them what made them unintentionally lose their decency and expose of their bodies what put them to shame. He said to them, “Allah only forbade you this tree lest you should come to be angels or be qualified to eternal existence.” 
    21. He swore to them that he was a sincere adviser.
    22. So he misled them both by delusion. No sooner did they taste the fruit of the forbidden tree than their private parts were exposed. They kept collecting leaves from the trees in Paradise to cover their naked bodies. There and then, Allah their Lord summoned them and said to them, “Did I not command you both to keep off this tree, and did I not inform you that Satan was and always will be your avowed enemy?”
    23. “Indeed, our Lord,” they said, “We were wrongful of actions, and unless You forgive our sins and extend Your mercy to us, we will most certainly be great losers.”
    24. Allah said, “Upon Our command We send all of you to a lower state, with mutual enmity to each other, and you will settle on earth where you will make abode and livelihood for a predetermined period of time.”
    25. “Therein you will live, and there you will die and be buried, and from there you will be resurrected.”
    26. O Children of Adam, We have sent down to you a raiment to cover your nakedness and with substances to adorn your personal appearance, and best of all is the vesture of piety. This is one of Allah’s striking signs to man so that you may remember the greatness of Allah and that He alone deserves to be worshiped (This story exhibits the punishment for disobeying Allah’s command so that people may recollect it and be keen to obey Him and thank Him for His blessings).
    27. O Children of Adam, do not let Satan lead you astray as he allured your original parents by the use of cunning and deceitful attractions, inducing them to lose their decency and expose their private parts, and there he attained the desired end. He sees you, and so do his associates; whereas you do not perceive them by sight. We made Satan and his associates patrons for those who do not sincerely believe in Allah.
    28. And when the disbelievers commit extremely evil deeds, such as associating others with Allah, they claim this was the system on which their fathers were bent, and they insolently allege that Allah has enjoined this system and is satisfied with it. Say to them, Prophet, “Allah does not enjoin immorality. Do you people attribute to Allah that for which you have no evidence?”
    29. Say to them, “Allah has enjoined the quality of being morally just and righteous, and that you set your faces toward Him at all times and places and dutifully observe your act of worship, devoting it to Him alone. As He brought you into being so will He resurrect you to go back to Him.”
    30. Some He has justly guided to His path of righteousness, and some deserved to be lost in the maze of error. They chose to take Satan and the satanic as their guides and to be under their patronage apart from that of Allah, and they think they are assuming the right course.
    31. O children of Adam, pay attention to your personal appearance and your apparel at every mosque where you dutifully observe your act of worship (not to mention the solemnity of applying yourselves to the presence of Allah. Eat and drink of the permitted but avoid extravagance. Allah does not like the extravagant who carry anything to excess.
    32. Say to them, Muhammad, “Who has forbidden the material objects and articles of apparel that Allah has brought out to His servants? And who has forbidden the worthy and wholesome victuals Allah has provided?” Say to them, “Such articles and objects, material and immaterial, were given to both believers and disbelievers in this world, but they are reserved exclusively on the Day of Judgment for the believers.” Thus, do We expound Our revelations and render Our words readily understood by those who know.
    33. Say to them, “Allah has indeed forbidden the evil line of conduct implying immorality (such as adultery), be it apparent or real, committed overtly or secretly. And He forbids unwarranted severe course of action and that you people associate with Him other deities of material or immaterial nature whom He never authorized, or to say about Allah whatever you do not know.
    34. And to every people, all and each, We have ordained a definite span of time, and when their time is fulfilled, they will never be able to delay it or anticipate it for one hour or for infinitesimally less.
    35. O children of Adam, when messengers from among you come to you to narrate to you My signs and recite to you My revelations, you fall into two groups: those who listen graciously and those who reject. And remember that he who reveres Allah with wisdom and piety will have escaped censure. He and such persons will have no ground for alarm, nor will fear or dread fall upon them, nor will they come to grief.
    36. Whereas those who reject faith, deny Allah and His ordinances, and waxed proud to Our revelations and signs will be the inmates of the Fire wherein they will have eternal suffering.
    37. Who is more unjust than he who viscously and wrongfully fabricates a lie against Allah or denies His revelations and signs? Such persons have what has been apportioned to them in life according to their good or bad books. And when Our angels of death take them up at the predetermined time, they ask them, “Where now are those you associated with Allah and invoked besides Him?” “They have erred away from us,” they say, “and failed our expectation.” So they were witnesses of their own actions and of their deeds reflecting disbelief and disobedience to Allah.
    38. And on the Day of Judgment, Allah will say to them, “Join those nations of the jinn and mankind who preceded you in the realm of Hell. As often as a fresh nation who disbelieved and followed suit is ushered in, it curses its unwise sister, until they are all gathered in. Then the latter will turn their eyes upon the former and say to Allah, “These, Allah, whom we thought were the example to follow, had indeed misled us and alienated us from Your purpose. Requite them, Allah, with double the torment in the fire.” There Allah says, “But all and each suffers twice as much, but you do not know.”
    39. Then says the former to the latter, “You were not of grace over us but we were both entangled in one party defiled with sin.” There, Allah says, “You have well deserved the torment in requital of your disbelief and disobedience.”
    40. Indeed, those who denied Our revelations and signs and their pride got the better of their prudence, and they did not repent, are they who are great losers. They will never enter Paradise until the camel passes through the needle’s eye; thus do We requite the criminals.
    41. Hell will be the bed they have made for themselves as a result of their iniquities; they will be tossed in blankets of fire. Thus do We requite those who were unjust to themselves and went astray. 
    42. But those who believed and did righteous deeds, realize that We do not charge any body with more than it can bear. It is they who have the rightful claim to Paradise, wherein they will enjoy themselves for eternity.
    43. We will delete all that was embedded of rancor from their hearts. They will jointly rejoice in Paradise, where they will enjoy the fresh rivers flowing beneath them and express their gratitude thus: “Praise be to Allah Who guided us to His path of righteousness and without Whose guidance we would have missed it. Indeed, His messengers have brought us the truth, which dawned upon us.” There and then Allah will call them, “This Paradise is a gift from Allah; you have come into its possession by divine grant because of your righteous deeds in this world.”
    44. Then those rejoicing in Paradise will call the inmates of Hell and say to them, “We have found the reward Allah had promised us (to be) the truth; have you found the torment Allah had promised you to be true?” “Indeed, we have,” say the inmates of Hell. And there, one of the announcers will announce, “Allah’s curse is cast upon the unjust wrongdoers.”
    45. The wrongful are those who stood in the way to prevent people from the way of Allah, making it their aim to pervert the truth and crook the path of righteousness, and never did they acknowledge the truth of the Hereafter.
    46. Between those in Paradise and these in Hell, there will be a partition veiling these from those; on the battlements, stand men. They are able to distinguish those in Paradise from these in Hell by their countenances. They call those in Paradise, hoping to enter it, and the latter give them the glad tidings of admission.
    47.And when their eyes are turned toward the inmates in Hell, they pray, “O Allah our Lord, we pray and beseech You not to associate us with the unjust wrongdoers.”
    48. Then those on the battlements will address those whom they recognize by their marks: “Do you now realize that all the multitudes you associated with did not avail you, nor did your proud arrogance?”
    49. They add, “Are those not they whom you swore Allah would never extend His mercy to? As you can clearly see, Allah has said to them, ‘Enter it safe, where you will have no ground for fear nor will you come to grief.’”
    50. Then those in Hell will call those in Paradise, “Leave us some water or some of the food, attire, and joys that Allah has provisioned you with.” In response they say, “We cannot because Allah has forbidden them to those who disbelieved in Him and in His blessings in the world,
    51. “And who treated their religion as a diversion and a plaything, and life had deluded them.” There, Allah says to them, “Now is the Day We forget you, and you will be left to twist and turn in the scorching flames of Hell in vindication of the right you had willfully forgotten. And you repudiated His revelations and signs betokening omnipotence and authority.”
    52. We sent down a Book expounding and distinctly expressing the sum of what is vaguely known and what is unknown, and with the divine knowledge including evidence of Our oneness and serving as a guide and a mercy to those who believe.
    53. Do the disbelievers purpose to wait until fitting events fulfill the prophecies and all that has been promised in the Book? But when such overwhelming events present themselves, those who had forgotten and disregarded the promise will say, “Indeed, now we do realize that the messengers of Allah brought us the truth. Are there intercessors to intercede for us or can we be permitted to go back to life below to do other than what we were doing?” Indeed, they have lost themselves and what they fabricated erred away from them.
    54. Indeed, Allah your Lord is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days (determined by His own unit of time). Then He levelled Himself on the throne of supremacy. He causes the day to lose its identity by absorption into the night which seeks it promptly. And the sun, the moon, and the stars He has governed by His cosmic laws and reduced to a state of subservience by His command. Indeed, to Him belong the creation of everything and the Command. Blessed be Allah, Lord of the universe and everything in it.
    55. Invoke Allah, the Creator of the universe, with humility, openly and secretly. He does not like the transgressors who associate others with Him or who are unjust to others. 
    56. And do not corrupt on earth after it has been set in order. And invoke Him with mingled feeling of fear of His just punishment and with anticipation of His reward. His mercy is indeed in immediate proximity of the fair-doers.
    57. It is He Who sends forth the wind as a forerunner of His mercy. The wind carries watery clouds. We drive them by high winds to a dead or droughty land where they pour their rain, and with it We cause the various products to spring up from the soil. Similarly do We resurrect the dead— an action consequent on Allah’s will, and it is hoped that people will ponder.
    58. The rich soil responds favorably to the fertilizing showers of rain and yields, Allah willing, a rich harvest; whereas rain evokes meagerly from bad soil. Thus We propound the signs for a people who thank Us.
    59. We sent Nuh (Noah) to his people. He said to them, “O my people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him! I fear for you an immense punishment on a Momentous Day.”
    60. But the dignitaries of his people said to him, “Indeed, we see that you are lost in the maze of error.”
    61. “My people,” he said, “I do not stand in error, but I am a messenger from Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    62. “A messenger who has come to convey to you the messages entrusted to me by Allah, my Lord, and to advise you sincerely and offer you counsel. I have knowledge of the truth imparted to me by Allah, and you just do not know what is true.
    63. “Do you people consider it astonishing that Allah sends to you illumination and enlightenment at the hands of a man from your midst in the capacity of a bearer of good news and a warning, to guide you to all truth, and to recognize Allah and revere Him as He deserves so that you may, it is hoped, deserve His mercy and blessings?”
    64. Yet they disbelieved him and thought he was conveying a false message. In consequence, We rescued him, together with those who willingly accepted his Message. We put them on board the ark and We drowned in the flood those who cried lies to Our signs. Their minds’ eyes were indeed blind.
    65. And to the people of `Ad, We sent their brother, the Messenger Hud, who said to them, “O my people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him. Can you not reverence Him?”
    66. But those disbelieving dignitaries of his people said to him, “We can see that you are foolish, and we think you are a great liar.”
    67. Hud said, “My people, I am not foolish (nor am I a liar). I am a messenger who is sent to you by Allah, Creator of the worlds.
    68. “I have been sent to impart to you Allah’s commands and prohibitions, and I am a sincere and honest adviser who is no liar.”
    69. Then Hud said to them, “Do you people consider it astonishing that Allah sends to you illumination and enlightenment at the hands of a man from your midst in the capacity of a bearer of glad tidings and a warning to guide you to all truth? You had better recall to mind His favors, and impel yourselves to be grateful for the efficacious grace He conferred on you. He made you the inheritors of the people of Nuh (Noah) and imparted to you a wealth of knowledge and privileged you with a distinguished stature more than He graced other nations. Therefore, remember with gratitude and humility the privileges Allah bestowed on you so that you may prosper.”
    70. Yet they said to him in astonishment, “Did you come to us, Hud, to tell us to worship Allah alone and renounce the gods whom our fathers revered and venerated? Then bring to pass the punishment that you have promised, if in fact you declare the truth.” 
    71. “Now,” said Hud, “you have confirmed yourselves in premeditated malice, and the prophecy of Allah’s punishment and anger against you is thus ratified. Do you contend against Allah in favor of your named idols that you and your fathers designated as gods—objects Allah never authorized? You just await the punishment prepared above in heaven; I will await it also.”
    72. And so We rescued him together with those who conformed their will to Allah’s will by the grace of Our mercy, and We uprooted from the earth those who denied Our signs; they were not among the believers.
    73. And to the people of Thamud We sent their brother Salih, who said to them, “O my people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him. There has come to you a sign from Allah your Lord evincing the truth of my mission. It is this she-camel, which is from your Lord. Let it graze freely on pasture on Allah’s earth, and keep her out of harm’s way lest you be heavily punished by a painful torment.
    74. “Recall His favors and the grace He conferred on you. He made you the successors of the people of `Ad and made the earth your world of destined habitation. On its plains you erect buildings, palaces, and castles, and its mountains you hew and carve into homes. Therefore, remember with gratitude and humility the privileges Allah bestowed on you and stop making corruption on earth and refrain from creating discord.”
    75. But the arrogant and the dignitaries of his people said to those whom they viewed as weak on account of conforming to the call, “Do you really believe that Salih has been sent by Allah his Lord in the capacity of a messenger?” “Indeed, we do,” they said, “and we acknowledge his mission and give credence to the spirit of truth imparted to him from Heaven guiding to all truth.”
    76. But those who proudly denied just requests said, “We refuse to acknowledge or give credence to what you believe (that is, the oneness of Allah that Salih calls for).”
    77. They manifested repugnance and hamstrung the she-camel in opposition and disobedience to Allah’s command and authority. And they defiantly said to Salih, “Now let us see how you will bring to pass the catastrophe you threatened that Heaven would inflict on us, if indeed you are a messenger sent by Allah!”
    78. There, the destructive commotion seized them and destroyed them and laid them prostrate and dead under the ruins of their demolished homes.
    79. And when Heaven avenged its own right, he turned away expressing his grief. “My people,” he said, “I conveyed to you Allah’s commands and prohibitions, and I advised you against disobeying Allah, and I announced the event, but you do not seem to like those who give you advice.”
    80. And We also sent Lut (Lot), who called to the oneness of Allah and said to his people, “Do you commit such obscenity as is contrary to the inherent character and moral constitution and never has it been practiced by humans before?
    81. “You certainly have lust for men in lieu of women. You are, indeed, a people given to excess and perversion.”
    82. But the response of his people was to say, “Oust his followers from your town and drive them away; they are averse to our disposition and wish to cleanse themselves (of what they imagine to be moral defilement).”
    83. So, We rescued him together with his family, but not his wife, who was just left with those to whom she adhered.
    84. We poured down upon them a rain of hard brimstones. And you can see the fatal consequence of those who were steeped in crime.
    85. And to the people of Madyan (Midian) We sent their brother Shu`ayb, who said to them, “O my people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him. There has come to you a sign from Allah your Lord evincing both the truth of my mission and Allah’s supremacy. Therefore, dispense the measure and the weight equitably to the full, and do not scant peoples’ goods and chattels, nor devalue what is valuable, nor create discord or make corruption on earth after it has been set in order. This is best for you if, indeed, you are believers.”
    86. He added, “Nor lie in ambush in every path threatening those of you who have conformed to the call, obstructing the path leading them to goodness, making it your aim to crook the path of righteousness to your own ends. Remember when once you were a small minority and how Allah made you multiply and reach the status of a majority, and look how fatal was the consequence of those before you who were corruptors.
    87. “However, since some of you have acknowledged my mission whereas others have not, then await the justice to be executed by Allah. He excels all those who sit in judgment.”
    88. But the arrogant among the dignitaries of his people said to him, “We will oust you; Shu`ayb, from our town, together with those who have believed with you, and drive all of you away unless you desert your worship in favor of our creed.” There, Shu`ayb said, “Even though, with execrations, we detest your system and shrink from it with horror!
    89. “If we should return to your creed,” said Shu`ayb, “then we will have viciously and wrongfully invented a lie against Allah and denied His revelations and signs. And how could we turn apostate after we have been graced by Allah, Who has delivered us from such an evil faith that brings nothing but harm here and in the Hereafter! This will never happen unless it be Allah’s will that we be destined to lose our faith. Allah’s knowledge encompasses everything. In Allah our Lord we trust, and to Him we and our people plead our causes, and He will justly decide them.” He prayed, “O Allah our Lord, You are the best and the most competent of all judges Who decide a case put by opposing parties.”
    90. There and then the wicked leaders among his people said to those who did not gather to their leaders’ standard, “If you should take Shu`ayb as a guide and espouse his cause, then you will be great losers.”
    91. But soon thereafter the commotion seized them and destroyed them and laid them prostrate and dead under the ruins of their demolished homes.
    92. Consequently, those who belied Shu`ayb, were inflicted with an irretrievable disaster so that they looked as if they had never dwelt nor flourished where they perished. Those who belied Shu`ayb were great losers.
    93. But Shu`ayb turned away and said, “O my people, I conveyed to you Allah’s message and His warning, and I advised you against disobeying Allah, and I announced the event. Therefore, how can I grieve over people who obstinately disbelieved in Allah?”
    94. Nor did We ever send a prophet to a town and its people turned deaf ears but We afflicted them with misfortunes and calamities in the hope that they would, for their own sake, supplicate Allah.
    95. Then We replaced the unfavorable conditions and hardships by favorable circumstances until they advanced in power, importance, and prosperity and proclaimed that misfortunes and prosperity had happened to their fathers before. In consequence, We suddenly seized them and dressed them with ruin, and We caught them unawares.
    96. Had the towns’ folk had belief and piety as ordained by Allah, We would have opened for them all channels of mercy, blessings, and prosperity from heaven above them and from the earth beneath their feet. But they obstinately and insolently denied Our signs, and We seized them for what they earned.
    97. Are the town’s folk certain that they are secure against Our wrath, which may be displayed in action at night while they are asleep?
    98. Or are the towns’ folk certain that they are secure against Our wrath, which may be displayed in action in broad daylight while they are playfully conducting themselves in an unprofitable or an evil way?
    99. Do they feel secure, their comfort flows to the extent that they can escape an event destined to happen according to Allah’s plan? Indeed, no one feels secure against Allah’s predetermined actions but those who are losers.
    100. Can those people who have inherited the earth not perceive the signal instances of punishment that befell their predecessors? Do they not realize that if We willed, We could requite them as and when We please for their iniquities and imprint their hearts with dullness of comprehension that they turn a deaf ear, unwilling to hear admonition?
    101. These were the towns’ folk whose course of events leading to final catastrophes are narrated to you. Their messengers came to them carrying sufficient evidence to establish their delegated authority to implement Our laws. But they refused to acknowledge what they and their fathers belied before. Thus does Allah imprint the hearts of the disbelievers who grow more and more wicked with dullness of comprehension.
    102. We found most of them irresolute and untrue to their covenant and promise, and in the hearts of most of them reigned vice, follies, and immorality.
    103. In succession, We sent Musa (Moses) to Pharaoh and his people, in whose hearts reigned vice and falsehood, and We equipped him with signs demonstrating delegated divine power and authority. But they were corruptors; and there, you can see what the end was of those who were characterized with premeditated malice.
    104. Musa said to Pharaoh, “O Pharaoh, I am a messenger carrying a divine message from Allah, Lord of the universe.
    105. “With great care and solemnity do I attribute to Allah nothing but the truth. I do hereby present you people with a sign from Allah your Lord evincing the truth of my mission. And by virtue of this sign, I demand the release of the Children of Israel from bondage (and that they be permitted to go with me to where they are free to worship Allah).”
    106. Pharaoh said, “If, indeed, you have a divine sign in your possession, then present it to view if you are telling the truth.”
    107. Musa immediately cast his staff onto the ground, and it was instantaneously transformed into an evident serpent.
    108. And he drew his hand from the folds of his garment and there it was instantaneously transfigured in a radiance of white light.
    109. But then those among courtmen and dignitaries said, “This man is indeed skilled in magic, and this is definitely not a sign from Allah.”
    110. They added, “He means to oust you people from your land and drive you away. Therefore what course of action do you command us to do?”
    111. They said to Pharaoh, “The time to degrade and defeat him and his brother has not come yet. Meanwhile, O Pharaoh, send some of your recruits to the cities to gather the multitude of men who practice magic.
    112. “And they bring back those who are skilled in the art of sorcery, who will expose what Musa came with so that no one would follow him.”
    113. The experts in sorcery came to Pharaoh and asked him, “Will we be rewarded if we overcome and gain superiority over Musa?”
    114. “Indeed,” said Pharaoh, “and you will also become among my nearest.”
    115. They said to Musa, “Would you like to cast (your artifice upon the ground) first or shall we cast ours first?”
    116. “You cast yours first,” said Musa. And when they did, they bewitched the viewers’ eyes so that they were terrified with the glorious sorcery.
    117. There and then We commanded Musa to cast his staff upon the ground, and there it gulped all the fraudulent devices that they had cast upon the ground.
    118. And there, they witnessed the truth that was justified by facts and results, just as they witnessed the falsehood that was condemned by the annulment of all their various objects of fiction.
    119. There, before the multitudes and right before Pharaoh’s eyes, a defeat was made. Those who had the expertise were reduced to helplessness and were humiliated by defeat.
    120. Overwhelmed with wonder, the sorcerers prostrated to the ground in comely order.
    121. They declared, “We surrender ourselves to Allah, the Lord of the worlds,
    122. the god of Musa and Harun (Aaron).”
    123. There, Pharaoh said to them, “Have you surrendered yourselves to his Allah without my permission? Indeed, this is a skillful deceit designed by you, Musa and Harun, to outwit the inhabitants of the city (or Egypt) to drive them out from here, and in consequence, you will come to know how heavily you will pay for this.
    124. “I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will have you all crucified.”
    125. “Gladly,” they said to Pharaoh. “We welcome your decision, which will haste us to Allah (Who confers on us the glorious privilege of martyrs).”
    126. And they added, “Do you take vengeance on us just because we have acknowledged the signs of Allah when they were presented to us, indicating clearly Allah’s omnipotence and supremacy, and because we yielded to the truth guiding us?” And they prayed, “O Allah our Lord, pour on us great patience and occasion our death as men who have conformed to Islam.”
    127. There and then said those of Pharaoh’s dignitaries, “O Pharaoh, would you set Musa and his people free so as to corrupt in the land and play mischief with your subjects and renounce you and your gods, disclaiming obedience to your laws?” But Pharaoh said, “We will kill their sons, and to serve our purpose, spare their women, and we will gain mastery over them and be their supreme vanquishers.”
    128. “Implore Allah’s aid,” said Musa to his people, “and resort to patience. The earth belongs to Allah. He apportions it as a heritage to whom He wills of His servants, and the happy outcome falls to those who piously revere Him as He deserves.”
    129. But his people said to him, “We have been burdened with cruel impositions before you came to us and since you have been with us.” Musa said, “May Allah your Lord cause your enemy to perish and designate you the successors in the land, and then He will see how you conduct yourselves in life!”
    130. We made Pharaoh and his people suffer heavy damage. They were distressed with dearth, and drought of products for years so that they might humble themselves to Allah and lift to Him their inward sight.
    131. Whenever they had good fortune on their side, they attributed it to their merit, and whenever they were befallen with a misfortune, they attributed it to Musa and his people, who were esteemed birds of evil omen. Indeed, events portending good or evil and all that is destined to happen rest in the hands of Allah (and the event is sanctioned by Allah). But most of them fail to know that.
    132. Being arrogant, obstinate men, they said to Musa, “No matter how bewitching the signs may be, we will never be convinced nor will you be able to bring us to believe the truth of your mission.”
    133. And there, We plagued them at intervals with an overwhelming inundation of water, then with locusts ravaging their crops. Later We infested them and their mammals, birds, and plants with lice. We inflicted them with leaping  swarms of frogs. Then We turned their lakes, rivers, and springs into blood, signs distinctly expressing all that was meant. Still they turned indignant and were arrogant, and they confirmed themselves in the horrid purpose and were a people steeped in crime.
    134. As often as they were grievously troubled, they appealed to Musa to invoke Allah his Lord. They said, “In virtue of the sufficient grace He conferred on you, pray Him to deliver us from this exhausting, burdensome affliction. And if you do, we promise to acknowledge the truth of your mission and release the Children of Isra'il from bondage so that they would be free to go with you.”
    135. Whenever We removed the cause of distress for a determined period of time, they promised Musa they would pay heed. But no sooner had they recovered than they broke their moral obligation.
    136. In consequence, We took just vengeance on them and drowned them in the main, in requital of their denial of Our signs, and were heedless of them.
    137. And by divine grant We brought those oppressed into possession of the eastern and western parts of the land We had blessed; thus has the good word of Allah your Lord answered the purpose, and complied with the conditions of the Children of Isra'il for their patience and endurance. And We destroyed all that Pharaoh and his people had erected of splendid structures.
    138. And We brought the Children of Israel safely across the sea, and there, they came across people who paid divine honors to idols. They demanded that Musa make for them an idol as an object of worship similar to the idols worshiped by those people. In response, Musa said, “You people are indeed ignorant.”
    139. He said, “These people's dumb idols will be annihilated. And vain is what they were doing.
    140. “Would I seek for you to venerate a deity other than Allah and adore him with appropriate acts and rites, when it was He Who graced you over the worlds?”
    141. And recall that Allah delivered you from the state of bondage and from the cruel impositions laid upon you by Pharaoh’s people, who brutally massacring your sons and spared your women. And this was indeed a severe test of your actions and reactions from your Lord.
    142. Then We ordained the divine assignation for Musa devotion imposed on him for thirty nights complemented by ten more nights to total forty nights appointed by his Lord. Musa said to his brother Harun, “Take my place and act for me among my people; improve the state of things, and put an end to abuse, disorder, and wrongdoing; and do not yield to those corruptors.”
    143. When Musa came to the place set for Our assignation, Allah spoke to Musa, he expressed his wish thus: “O Allah my Lord, may I Look upon You by sight?” “You will never be able to look upon Me,” said Allah. “But look at the mountain. If it remains standing in its place, you will then see Me.” And when Allah manifested Himself to the mountain, the mountain was leveled with the ground. Terribly shocked, Musa collapsed stunned, and when he recovered, he prayed, “Praise be to You, Allah, and extolled are Your glorious attributes. I stand humbly repentant and I am the first and foremost of believers.”
    144. “I have elected you, Musa,” said Allah, “by preference out of all people to convey My divine message revealed directly to you. Therefore, take all that I have imparted to you and act strongly upon it and be thankful.”
    145. We set down for him in writing, on the Tablets the admonition that bore reference to every subject, distinctly expressing all that was meant. And We commanded him to act strongly upon all that was imparted in the Tablets to him and to enjoin his people to adopt those best divine precepts, which would be in their best interests. And We added, “I will show you and your people the destined desolate abode and the destined insecure condition of those who are immoral.”
    146. Allah said, “I will turn away from My signs those whose pride gets the better of their prudence, who exhibit unjustifiable arrogance in the world.” Whenever they see a sign clearly indicating Allah’s authority, they take pride in setting it to naught; and when they see the path of righteousness, they simply avoid it; but when they see the path of misguidance, they follow it. This accords well with their persistent denial of Our signs that they have been oblivious of.
    147. And those who refuse to recognize Our revelations and signs and who reject the truth of resurrection and the audience of Allah on the Day of Judgment are losers. Their hopes will be doomed to disappointment and their deeds to worthlessness. Will they be requited but with what is commensurate with their deeds?
    148. The people of Musa, in his absence, melted all their gold ornaments and built a body in the image of a Calf that lowed like cattle when the wind passed through it. Did they not perceive that it was mute? It never spoke to them, nor would it guide them or determine the course of events! Yet they reverenced it and adored it with appropriate acts and rites, and they were unjust wrongdoers.
    149. When they realized that they had committed themselves to evil and had wandered from the path of righteousness, they said, “Now, unless Allah our Lord extends His mercy to us and forgives us, we will most certainly be great losers.”
    150. And when Musa returned and found that his people had wronged themselves, he strongly resented their evil act, and great was his indignation against them. Grieved at heart, he said, “Evil, indeed, is what you did in my absence. Did you wish Allah’s Command of punishment to be hastened on?” He dropped the Tablets and dragged his brother by the head, laying the blame on him. But Harun said to him, “O son of my mother, the people judged me lacking in power and authority over them and almost killed me. Therefore, do not let my enemies gloat over me and rejoice at my misfortune, nor should you associate me with the unjust wrongdoers.”
    151. Musa turned to Allah, invoking His forgiveness on behalf of himself and his brother, and he added, “O Allah our Lord, we pray and beseech You to admit us into the realm of Your mercy, You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
    152. Indeed those who reverenced the Calf and adored it will draw Allah’s wrath on themselves and will be incensed with humiliation in life below, for thus do We requite the fabricators.
    153. But those who commit themselves to evil and soon thereafter repent humbly and return to the obedience of Allah with hearts impressed with belief, will find Allah Ever-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    154. When Musa's anger calmed down, he picked up the Tablets containing in their text the guidance and Allah’s mercy toward those who have awe towards Allah.
    155. There, Musa chose from his people seventy persons, in compliance with Allah’s command to present themselves at the divine assignation. When they gathered at the arranged time and place, fearful echoes thundered in their ears and the earth’s surface convulsed under their feet as an expression of strong divine reproach against those among them who committed themselves to the most evil conduct. There and then Musa prayed, “O Allah my Lord, if You had willed, You would have caused them and me to perish before now. Would You destroy us in requital of the evil committed by the foolish among us? It is Your means of trial; You use it to subject people to the test and consequently deafen the hearts’ ears of whom You will and guide whom You will. You are our Protector. We beseech You to forgive us and to have mercy on us. You are The Most Merciful of all who forgive.”
    156. He added, “Therefore, we pray and beseech You to bestow on us Your efficacious grace in this world and in the Hereafter. We have Judaized and surrendered ourselves to You, and our purpose and cause to Your divine service.” Allah said, “My torment is a penalty that I inflict on whom I will, and My mercy is extended to the wide circle of all things. I will accord it to those who entertain the profound reverence due to Me, give poor-dues, and believe in Our revelations and signs.”
    157. I will accord it to those who follow the mission of Our Messenger, the unlettered Prophet whom they find well described in their Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and in the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]). The Prophet who enjoins on them equity and the general principles of justice and who forbids them all that is wrongful and obscene. He informs them of all that Allah has rendered lawful for them to eat and of all that is unlawful. He will release them from the rules fettering them and from the restrictions imposed upon them and the anxious thoughts that burdened them. Therefore, those who believe in him, give credence to his message, honor him, afford him the help he needs, and act in accordance with the enlightenment imparted to him, will be the recipients of Allah’s mercy and blessings, and it is these whom Heaven will cause to prosper.
    158. Say to them, Muhammad, “O people, you had better believe that I am the Messenger who has been sent to you all with a divine message from Allah, Who has the rightful claim to the heavens and the earth and Who has the supreme controlling power and the absolute authority over them. There is no god but Him Who gives life and death. Therefore, you had better believe in Allah and accept His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet who solemnly believes in Allah and in His divine words—those inspired to him and to other messengers before him. You had better give credence to his speech and follow him so that you may be guided to the path of righteousness.”
    159. Among the people of Musa are some who guide with the spirit of truth and with the truth implement the general principles of justice.
    160. And We cut them up into twelve tribes characterized by common descent (from one of the twelve sons of Ya`qub [Jacob]). And We revealed to Musa to strike the rock with his staff when his people suffered thirst in the wilderness, and there gushed forth twelve springs and each tribe knew the spring belonging to them. And We overshadowed them with clouds to protect them from the heat of the sun, and We ordained that the heavens provide them manna and quails, and We said to them, “Eat of the good victuals We provided you.” Actually, they did not wrong Us, but they, in fact, unjustly wronged themselves.
    161. We said to them, “Make abode in this town (Jerusalem) and eat as you will, wherever you will. It is replete with choice of all delights. Enjoy all that is wholesome and affords pleasure, and express your thoughts in words, invoking Me to relieve your hearts and unload your burden of sins. Humble yourselves and prostrate constantly to Me as you go through the gate. Then and only then I will forgive your iniquities and reward those whose deeds are imprinted with piety with something greater than what corresponds with their piety.” 
    162. But the wrongdoers exchanged the virtuous words authorized by Heaven for the false words of their own making, and in consequence Heaven came upon them with a torturing punishment in requital of their injustice.
    163. Ask them about the town (of Ailah), which stood on the sea-front, where they used to transgress Allah’s commandment and break the Sabbath ordained by Allah to be set apart for rest and worship. The fish were made to come to the surface on the Sabbath day and to dive deep on other days—a trial to test their prevalent immorality.
    164. A group of righteous people among the people of Musa said to those concerned, “Why waste your breath admonishing people destined to suffer annihilation or condemnation?” “This,” said the concerned, “is only to discharge the duty imposed by Allah your Lord toward these people so that they might, it is hoped, be pious.”
    165. But when they were deaf to exhortation, We rescued those who urged them to laudable conduct, and We put to the torment of misery and distress those wrongdoers in requital of their premeditated malice.
    166. When they insolently persisted in disobedience, We laid their transgression to their charge and decreed that they be monkeyfied and that their monkey-like character and behavior be viewed with contempt and that they be despised and rejected of men.
    167. There and then Allah your Lord proclaimed that He would send against them those who would persecute them till the Day of Resurrection. Allah is swift indeed in executing the law, and He is also Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    168. And We split them into separate groups forming communities among the populations of the various countries of the world. Among them are those who are virtuous, who instruct men in the way of righteous living, and others who are contrary in nature, who flourish on wickedness. We have tried them with interchange of favors and efficacious grace, and with disfavors, misfortunes, and disgrace that they may, it is hoped, return to Allah.
    169. Then, there came their successors who inherited  the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) had devolved. Yet they chose to go by the world and its vanities, and thought of unmerited forgiveness. They said, “We will be forgiven our iniquities,” and in vanity they wasted their days. Every opportunity favorable to a wicked end or purpose gave them occasion to a burst of merriment. Do they not recall that they subscribed to the covenant that Allah had revealed in the Tawrah, which they have carefully studied—the covenant forbidding them to attribute anything to Allah but the truth and emphasizing that the Hereafter is infinitely better and more advantageous to those who revere Allah as He deserves. Can you people not reflect?
    170. Nonetheless, those who adhere to the Tawrah and abide by it and observe their act of prayer will be recipients of Allah’s mercy and blessings. We do not withhold or withdraw the grateful return due to those whose deeds are imprinted with piety.
    171. And you People of the Book had better recall once when your fathers camped at the foot of the mount and heaven thundered and the awe-inspiring echoes sounded in their ears as We entered with them into a covenant, and We stabilized the mount above them when it shook with such fits of awe for the profound reverence due to Allah and they thought it was collapsing over their heads. There and then We said to them, “Adhere to all that We have imparted to you (the Tawrah), observe firmly the code of discipline and the body of regulations, and hold them in esteem; hold to your promise and pay attention to it and regard it; and be mindful of Our commandments so that you may be pious.” 
    172. Allah your Lord brings forth the progeny of the Children of Adam from their backs, so as to be witnesses of their own reaction to Allah, they were asked, “Am I not your Lord?” “Indeed, You are,” they answered. Allah said, “Then you cannot deny this on the Day of Judgment with the excuse that you were heedless of this fact.”
    173. Or you might say, “Our fathers associated other deities with Allah, and as we are their descendents, they have had much influence on our thoughts. Will You, Allah, subject us to perish to pay a debt owed to You by the wrong-doers?”
    174. Thus do We expound Our revelations to the Children of Adam so that they may return and be dutiful to Allah.
    175. And narrate to them, Muhammad, the story (of the Israelite) to whom We imparted intellectual acquaintance with all the facts and We vested him with the power of comprehending Our signs. Yet he stripped himself out of them and refrained from proceeding with Our purpose. Consequently, he was followed by the devil, who led him to the maze of error. 
    176. Had We willed, We would have opened his heart’s ears and influenced him with the divine course of action and thereby exalted his faculties to the highest honors. But he chose to follow his prejudices earthward, indulge in vanities, and remain low. And there, he stood exactly like the dog that lolls its tongue whether you drive it away or you let it alone. This is exactly the similitude of those who cry lies to Our revelations and signs. Therefore, Muhammad, recourse to the narratives of such persons so that they may pause to meditate.
    177. Evil, indeed, is the similitude of those who cried lies to Our signs and refused to recognize Our revelations and were unjust to themselves.
    178. Indeed, he whom Allah guides to His path of righteousness is he who is guided by the truth, and those whom Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness are they who are losers.
    179. We have disposed to the abode in Hell many of the jinn and mankind. They carry hearts stigmatized with dullness of comprehension and eyes lacking perception, and they have no ears for admonition. These are exactly similar to cattle, in fact even worse, and these are the heedless of truth.
    180. To Allah belong all the commendable attributes you people may use when invoking Him under any circumstance, and disregard those who use them profanely. They will be requited with what is commensurate with their profanity.
    181. Among those whom We have brought into being are a nation who seek Allah; they guide others to the truth, which they interpret in implementing justice.
    182. And those who cried lies to Our revelations and signs (will cast themselves headlong into Hell). We will give them plenty of rope to allow them free scope so that, unawares to themselves, they will commit themselves to evil.
    l83. I give them respite, but My scheme of action is decisive and strikes at the root.
    184. Do the disbelievers not pause to think of the Messenger and his mission, and honestly admit that he is not possessed by madness nor is there a demoniac element in him? He is but a warner who stands manifest of moral sublimity.
    185. Do they not see into the immensity of the universe and look at the realms of the heavens and the earth and the precision with which structures are related and at the unique government of all that He has created? Do they not ponder that the end of their term of life may well be approaching? Therefore, if they refuse to acknowledge the truth as is featured in these signs, what then will convince them if these signs and this divine message do not?
    186. He whom Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness will find no one to guide him thereto. He gives them free scope and action in order to blunder in the maze of error.
    187. The disbelievers insolently call upon you, Muhammad, to ask you when the predetermined Eventful Hour of Judgment will take place. Say to them, “It is only Allah alone Who knows when. He alone has the rightful knowledge of the how and when of here and hereafter; no one reveals it when due but Him as His word prompts. It weighs quite heavily on the heavens and on all those within and on the earth and on the hopes of all those therein. And the encounter with it will take you suddenly by surprise.” They ask you about it as if you were acquainted how and when and as a result you have been informed. Say to them, “Rest assured that it is only Allah alone Who does know when, but most people do not know.”
    188. Say to them, Muhammad, “I have no control over what will become of me or of what will befall me, be it good or bad, but it is all as Allah wills (He is the Principal Power by Whom events are unalterably predetermined). If I indulged in prophecy and were able to foretell future events and realize the unseen, I would have made all charitable things abound in me, and I never would have failed to be out of harm’s way. I am only a warner and a bearer of good tidings to believing people.”
    189. It is He Who brought you into being from one single self (Adam) and from him He made of it its spouse whom he sought consolation and found comfort. And when the early man approached her with amorous intention, she conceived and the pregnancy passed unnoticed in its early stages. But as the mother grew heavier, the parents invoked Allah’s mercy and blessings: “If You give us a righteous child free from abnormalities and malformations, we will most certainly be grateful.”
    190. And when Allah gave them a righteous child, they associated other deities with Him. Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely far beyond all those they associate with Him.
    191. Is it befitting that they associate with Him any created being who is incapable of creating a living being? Allah has brought everything into being and caused it to exist.
    192. Nor can these objects of worship vindicate them or vindicate themselves.
    193. And if you idolaters invoke them to offer you counsel, they will not respond, whether your invocation is expressed in words or in thought.
    194. You had better realize, O people, that those whom you invoke besides Allah are created beings like yourselves; therefore, invoke them and see if they respond if you truly believe that you are declaring the truth!
    195. Do they have legs to walk or hands to assault with, or do they have eyes to see or ears to hear? They have neither the special faculties to perceive external objects nor the faculties of understanding or intelligence. Say to them, Muhammad, “Call on your predominant partners who have authority over you besides Allah, and let them devise their plan of unfavorable action against me and conduct it to conclusion, and give me no respite.
    196. “My Patron is Allah, Who has revealed the Book (the Qur’an). He is the Patron of those whose deeds are righteous.
    197. “Whereas the idols that you invoke besides Him will fail forever to vindicate you or themselves.
    198. “And if you should call them to offer you guidance, they cannot hear you let alone guide you, and you can see their eyes staring vacantly at you, unable to see.”
    199. Be clement, Muhammad, and favor forbearance, and enjoin conformity of life and conduct to the requirements of morality, disregarding the impudent who are ignorant.
    200. And if Satan entices you by suggesting divergence or discord, do not consent, but seek refuge to Allah, counter to the evil Satan instigated. Allah is indeed All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    201. Those who revere Allah as He deserves if a satanic touch of evil is suggested secretly to them, they immediately bring religion into touch with conduct and lift their inward sight to Allah.
    202. Yet the satanic keep driving divergence, by dint of repetition, into the disbelievers’ heads and do not stop short.
    203. And if you do not present them with a supernatural sign to satisfy their desire, they wish you would go in quest of it. Say to them, “I only follow what is revealed to me by my Lord; this is the Qur’an, the true illumination and enlightenment. It is revealed by Allah your Lord to guide the believers into the truth and to confer on them Allah’s mercy.
    204. O you people who have conformed to Islam, when the Qur’an is read, listen attentively to it so that you may be recipients of Allah’s mercy.
    205. And bear Allah your Lord in your innermost thoughts and secret feelings with devotional contemplation, humbleness and profound reverence at the beginning and the end of the day. Let not your innermost being be unmindful of Allah.
    206. Indeed, those who are in the Providence of (Allah) your Lord are not too proud to adore Him with appropriate acts and rites. They praise Him and extol His glorious attributes and prostrate themselves to Him in veneration.
* A prostration should be performed here.



