SURAH 8
AL- ANFAL
The Spoils of War
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah outlines the body of rules to be followed in wartime, the reasons for declaring war, and the factors that would lead to victory. The surah also treats the subject of the spoils of war and the fate of the captives. Here we find the detailed narrative of the Battle of Badr, the circumstances preceding it and those succeeding it, and the reason for each, such as the ousting of the Prophet Muhammad from Makkah. And just as the reasons for war are stated, so, too, are those for peace, especially when the enemy inclines to peace. The surah tells those who believe to stick together and not to submit to oppression or persecution because of their faith, but to leave to another land where they can struggle with their fellow believers for the dignity of Islam and of themselves.
    
   
    1. They ask you, Muhammad, about the spoils of war: what to do with them, to whom they belong, and how they are to be divided among the victors. Say to them, “They belong to Allah and to the Messenger who follows Allah’s divine instructions. The main thing is that you people be pious to Allah as He deserves, stand firm to Allah’s principles and purpose, adjust all matters of difference, and obey Allah and His Messenger if indeed you are believers.”
    2. Those whose innermost thoughts and secret feelings are indeed purposed to serve Allah are they with latent fear at the thought of Allah. When His revelations are recited to them, their force of belief becomes stronger and more powerful in faith, and they rely on Allah, their Creator and Protector.
    3. It is they who faithfully observe their act of prayer and spend in divine service of what Allah has apportioned to them of His bounty.
    4. These are the true believers whose hearts reflect religious virtues. They have grades of rank and quality commensurate with their deeds, in addition to forgiveness and generous blessed provisions.
    5. The spoils of war precipitated diversity of opinion, exactly as did your contemplated expedition when Allah your Lord induced you, Muhammad, to leave your home on a mission of truth authorizing war of belief against disbelief. Some of those who conformed to Islam did not have fighting in their minds and were hesitant to join battle, declaring their aversion.
    6. Disputing with you with opposing arguments after it had been made clear to them that they would have the victory, they behaved as if they would be driven to death as if they saw it in their eyes as a monstrous apparition.
    7. Allah has promised you victory over one of the two parties. You chose to seize the unarmed caravan for easy gains; whereas Allah willed that you go at the well-armed troops that came to their aid, so that truth should triumph over falsehood and His words be verified to uproot the disbelievers.
    8. And thus Allah will vindicate the truth and blot out falsehood, offensive as such action may be to those sinful criminals.
    9. You implored Allah’s aid with entreaties, and Allah responded favorably, thus: “I will uphold you with one thousand angels in sets succeeding one another.”
    10. We made this support to give you people mental comfort and glad tidings and to make your hearts return to their settled calmness. Indeed, victory comes only by the help of Allah, Who is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    11. And there Allah replaced the sorrow and grief, which were caused by fear of the unpredictable outcome, with peace and sense of security, thus inducing you to slumber. He sent down rain from heaven to purify you people from the incitement of evil instigated by Satan and by those with characteristics befitting him, and to brace your hearts and set your feet firm.
    12. There and then Allah your Lord inspired the angels thus: “I am with you, and so support the cause of the believers, and help them take a firm position and set their feet firm. I will cast terror in the hearts of those who are given to disbelief. Strike them above the necks and strike their fingertips, their weak limbs, and their failing joints.”
    13. This train of events was because they were opposed to Allah and to His Messenger; and he who is opposed to Allah and His Messenger will realize that Allah punishes severely indeed.
    14. This is it, you disbelievers, but that is not all; there awaits you the torment to be laid on the disbelievers.
    15. O you who believe, if you happen to meet with the disbelievers and you see they are marshaled for fighting you, do not turn your backs upon them or retreat.
    16. And he who turns his back or retreats—unless it be a stratagem for gaining advantage over the enemy or for falling back to other troops (of his own) projected as the larger military operation of the campaign—will have drawn Allah’s anger on himself and will be destined to the abode in Hell. And how evil is the destination! 
    17. You people must realize that it was not you who brought death upon the disbelievers, but it was Allah Who killed them. It was not you, Muhammad, who aimed when you threw (sand), but it was Allah Who directed the sand (you threw) at your enemy; it was Allah Who blinded their sight. Nonetheless, Allah has determined to test the quality of those who believe with gracious intentions; on the one hand with His prevenient grace producing the repentance and faith without which the grace of justification cannot be received, and on the other hand with the efficacious grace really effecting the end for which it is given. Allah is indeed All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    18. And so, this is the great vindication. Meantime, Allah defies the disbelievers; enfeebling their volition and renders their stratagem inefficient.
    19. And you disbelievers, if you were looking for victory and judgment, your hopes have been doomed to disappointment (The Ka`bah belongs to those who believe). And if you exercise your faculty of volition toward peaceful existence and desist from the hostile course of action and your prudence gets the better of your pride, it would be to your advantage. But if your pride gets the better of your prudence and you resume hostilities, then the two sides will inevitably meet again. And your troops, numerous as they will be, will be of no advantage to you, for Allah vindicates the believers.
    20. O you who believe, obey Allah and His Messenger and never withdraw from his presence when you are hearing his discourse.
    21. Nor permit yourselves to be like the hypocrites who pretended to have listened faithfully to the truth and pretended to abide by it when, in fact, they do not hear.
    22. Indeed, the disbelievers and the hypocrites are like the worst creatures in Allah’s sight; they are deaf and dumb and unwilling to hear or heed.
    23. If Allah had found any good in them, He would have opened their hearts’ ears. And if He had done so, they would have turned away and been veering away from the truth.
    24. O you who believe, respond favorably to Allah’s commands and to the admonition by His Messenger when he invites you to lead a life that deserves the name, a life by which one knows and reasons and exercises the power of thought and understanding. And you people had better know that Allah intervenes between man and his heart to open its ears or close them, and that to Him you will all be gathered.
    25. And avoid dissension, temptation, and discord, which may be brewed by some and practiced by others. The fatal consequence does not fall only on the unjust, but it unites all of you, and you must know that Allah punishes severely in this world and in the Hereafter.
    26. Remember that you were some few viewed with contempt, living in fear of persecution, abduction, and exile, and Allah put you under His guardianship and reinforced you by His additional support and gave you victory. He provided you with victuals of the various good kinds, hoping you would be thankful and strive to make the word of truth the upper one. 
    27. O you who believe, do not betray the trust or Allah and His Messenger, Who trusted you, or knowingly misappropriate anything that has been entrusted to you.
    28. And you must know that your wealth and your progeny are but a temptation and a means of trial to test your course of actions. And do not forget that in Allah’s realm you obtain the ultimate reward.
    29. O you who believe, if you are pious to Allah as He deserves, He will confer on the Criterion of knowing and reasoning so that you can judge the difference between good and evil to the end that He forgives your iniquities. He is the source of sufficient grace abounding in whom He wills, and of efficacious grace that effects the end for which it is given.
    30. And remember, Muhammad, how the disbelievers cleverly plotted to take you as a prisoner and keep you in bondage or kill you, and in His plan Allah also charitably plotted. And who can gain advantage over Allah?
    31. When Our revelations are recited to them, they insolently say, “We have heard, and the like of this we heard before, and if we willed, we could say the like thereof. This is nothing but myths of old.”
    32. And remember, Muhammad, when their pride and insolence got the better of their prudence and they said, “O Allah, if this is divine truth revealed from Your Providence, then pour down upon us from the heaven a rain of stones or bring us a painful torment.”
    33. But Allah was not going to torment while you were in their midst, nor was He going to put them to the torment before giving them plenty of rope to allow them free scope so that they either commit themselves and deserve annihilation, or are sober-minded and repent and ask Allah’s forgiveness.
    34. What excuse can they offer now to justify their wrongdoing and to bar prosecution? Therefore, there is every reason why Allah should torment them for their offense. They have abused the act of grace. They malevolently obstructed the way to the Inviolable Mosque  when they are not its patrons. Its patrons are those who are pious to Allah as He deserves, but most of these do not realize this fact.  
    35. Their prayer at the Inviolable House was simply whistling and clapping. Therefore, you disbelievers have well deserved to be put to the torment in requital for your disbelief.
    36. These disbelievers spend their money in the warring campaigns of disbelief against belief with the motive of obstructing the way to the path of Allah, the path of righteousness. They will spend until they exhaust themselves and suffer losses, and then lament the events and circumstances with regret. Then reason will conquer passion, and they will lose the field and be subdued, and all the disbelievers will be mustered into Hell.
    37. Defeat in this world and torture with the Fire in the Hereafter are intended by Allah to distinguish those who prevail upon themselves to serve Him, and to expose those who perform halfheartedly and those who are always doing evil. He sums up the evidence of all evil and adds it together and casts all who are evil in their composition into Hell. These are the losers.
    38. Tell these disbelievers, Muhammad, that if they are willing to renounce disbelief, desist from evil purpose, and turn to Allah, they will be forgiven their past iniquities. But should they resume hostilities and persist in their intentional assertion of falsehood, then suffice it to say that Allah’s enactment in the past for the earliest people has gone by.
    39. Then fight against them the good fight of faith until temptation comes to an end and concord replaces discord and Allah’s system of faith and worship prevails, and people take upon themselves the recognition that the religion is all for Allah and that He has rightful claim to obedience, reverence, and worship. If they desist and turn to Allah, He certainly is All-Seeing of all that they do.
    40. But if they refuse and turn a deaf ear, then you Muslims must realize that Allah is your Supreme Patron and your Supreme Vindicator.
    41. And you Muslims must know that whatever you capture from your enemy in the way of spoils of war comes under Allah’s authority. One-fifth is assigned to Allah and to the Messenger, to the kindred, and to the orphans and the indigent and the way farer. That is if you have believed in Allah and in what was sent down to Our Messenger on the day of the Criterion when the two forces met. And Allah is Able to do all things. He vindicated the believers despite their small number and defeated the disbelievers despite their large number.
    42. You were on the near side of the valley and the disbelievers were on the far side, and the caravan was proceeding below you—a web of circumstance timely arranged by The All-Powerful. Had you tried to plan such a precise arrangement you would have failed. Allah planned it in such a manner as to help you obtain an advantage over your enemy, who outnumbered you greatly. The survivors among the disbelievers would then realize that their defeat was after a clear evidence made by Allah’s omnipotence and authority, and the survivors among the Muslim victors would realize after a clear evidence Allah’s omnipotence and sovereignty. And Allah is indeed   All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    43. O Muhammad, Allah in His infinite mercy has presented to you in your sleep the troops of the disbelievers as being few. Had He presented them to you as being numerous, you would have been anguished and dismayed, and you would have fallen into contention. But Allah saved you; He is All-Knowing of all that is brewed secretly in the hearts.
    44. When the two forces met, We showed to you as being few, and you were viewed as being few, so that you would assail each other and Allah’s Command would be served. And to Allah, the Ultimate Authority, are submitted all matters for consideration, decision, and execution here and in the Hereafter.
    45. O you who believe, when you meet a troop of your enemies, do not waver, but be resolute and firm, and think of Allah as often as you can so that He may prosper and gain the upper hand.
    46. Obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not contend with each other with opposing arguments lest your hopes should be doomed to disappointment and you lose heart. Have patience and remember that Allah is with the patient. 
    47. And be not like those who left their homes for battle, deliberately and ostentatiously displaying their might in order to attract notice, win admiration, and warn others. They aimed to obstruct the way to the path of Allah, the path of righteousness, but Allah is All-Encompassing of all that they do. 
    48. They were fooled by Satan, who allured them to brighter worlds (as a logical result of their doings). “Rest assured,” Satan said, “that no man can overpower you today in battle, and I will be your neighbor.” But when the two forces saw each other, he turned on his heels and reversed his position, declaring his innocence of their ills, and said, “I see what you cannot see; I fear Allah, Whose punishment is laid upon the damned.”
    49. There and then the hypocrites and those with sick hearts said, “How foolish the Muslims are to challenge such a large force! They are deluded by their religion (which induced them to attack a great and superior force!)” But he who puts his trust in Allah will find Allah All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    50. If you could only see the disbelievers when the angels of death besiege them to take their selves, how the angels descend violently upon them, striking their faces and their hind-backs and saying to them, “Now you will taste the torment of the Fire laid upon the damned.
    51. “This is what your hands have forwarded, and Allah is not unjust to His servants.”
    52. These peoples’ attitude is not different from that of the house of Pharaoh and their predecessors. They disbelieved in the signs of Allah. So Allah took them for their sins. Allah is indeed All-Powerful (His torment is laid upon the damned).
    53. Allah never withdraws or changes His favor that He graced a given nation with until they change their own attitude and the disposition of their innermost being. Allah is indeed All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    54. (A reasoning marked by circumspection: it is attentive to all circumstances that may affect action, circumstances that are similar to those of Pharaoh and his people and their predecessors) who denied Allah’s signs and revelations and persisted in their intentional assertion of falsehood. As a result, We destroyed them in requital of their willful violation of the divine law and their transgression against Allah and His commands. We drowned Pharaoh and his people; they were all unjust  wrongdoers.
    55. Indeed, the worst creatures before Allah are those who have disbelieved, and who are deaf to divine discourse and disbelieve in Allah.
    56. Those who concluded with you, Muhammad, a truce and resolved to cause a discord to pass into a concord; yet they break every agreement contracted for peace, and they never piously revere Allah as He deserves.
    57. Therefore, whenever and wherever you Muslims meet them in hostile contention, destroy them to set an example of their humiliation and to disperse those who attempt thereafter to wage war against you.
    58. If you should suspect treachery on the part of people with whom you have concluded a peace treaty, let them know that you have cancelled the treaty just the same. Indeed, Allah detests the treacherous.
    59. And those disbelievers who must realize that they have not escaped His advance knowledge and omniscience, nor will they keep Him from afflicting them with a punishment.
    60. And prepare for them, you Muslims, all the strength that you can recruit—armed forces and mounted troops—to strike terror into the hearts of Allah’s enemy, who is your enemy, and into the hearts of others whom you do not know but whom Allah knows. And remember that whatever you spend in the way of Allah, you will be reimbursed for it and you will never be unjustly wronged.
    61. If they incline to reconcile themselves with their own hearts and with Allah and make peace, then be willing to incline thereto, and put your trust in Allah. He is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    62. And if this happens to be an instance of deception and they mean to disappoint your expectation of peace, then good enough for you is Allah to count upon for support. It is He Who upheld your cause and crowned you with His victory and with the believers.
    63. It is He Who made them reconcile themselves with their own hearts and with Allah. If you had spent all the available wealth on earth for this purpose, you would have failed to unite their hearts. But Allah brought this unison. Allah is indeed All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    64. O Prophet, sufficient for you and for those Muslims who follow you is Allah, Who upholds your cause and helps you accomplish your divine purpose.
    65. O Prophet, urge the Muslims to action. Twenty of you exercising patience and standing firm will vanquish two hundred, and if there are a hundred of such a caliber, they will defeat a thousand of the disbelievers who are fighting against the truth because they are characterized by dullness of comprehension.
    66. Now that the powers of good have defeated the powers of evil, Allah, being aware of your poor physical strength, has commuted your obligation due to Him. If there are a hundred of you who exercise patience and stand firm, they will vanquish two hundred; and if there are one thousand, they will vanquish two thousand, Allah willing. Allah upholds the patient.
    67. No prophet is entitled to take prisoners of war under the circumstances when the disbelievers are doing their best to defy Allah’s religion, until he has humbled the avowed enemies of faith and subdued the land. To take prisoners and ransom them at this stage means that you Muslims are concerned with the interests and pleasures of this life, when Allah wills the Hereafter. And Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    68. Had it not been for Allah’s authoritative decree proclaimed beforehand to forgive, you people would have been severely tormented for what you have undertaken.
    69. Therefore, you may enjoy what you have gained in the way of spoils of war; it is a lawful and a good gain. But fear Allah and piously revere Him as He deserves.
    70. O Prophet, say to the captives that if Allah finds in your hearts a zeal to promote the common good, He will compensate to you more than what you have lost and forgive your offense. Allah is All-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    71. And if they intend to betray you, they have betrayed Allah’s cause before, but Allah gave you power to subdue them, and Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    72. Those who have believed and migrated to where they could best serve Allah and strove in His cause with their wealth and their lives, and those who gave them refuge and vindicated them, are joined one to another in mutual intimacy. Those who conformed to Islam but due to social or business interests did not immigrate to where they could best serve Allah, will be denied your protection until they have emigrated (from their homes). But if they seek your aid against persecution directed against them by their people for holding Allah’s religion, then it is incumbent on you to help them, unless you happen to have concluded a treaty of mutual alliance with their people. Allah is All-Seeing of all that you do.
    73. These disbelievers who deny Allah are patrons of one another and afford each other mutual help; and unless you Muslims do the same, then discord will replace concord and the world will be given to great mischief and corruption.
    74. And those who have believed Islam and immigrated to where they could best serve Allah, and strove in His cause with their wealth and their lives, as well as those who gave them refuge and helped them, are the recipients of Allah’s blessings. These are indeed the faithful who are conscientious in the fulfillment of their duty to Allah. They will be graced with forgiveness and blessed provisions.
    75. And those who have since believed and emigrated (from their homes) at a later date and fought in the cause of Allah by your side, constitute an integral part of you and enjoy the same rights. Now that the stability of the faith has been ensured, then those who are related by blood have prior rights toward each other, as is decreed in the Book of Allah. Allah is indeed All-Knowing of everything.
