SURAH 9
AT-TAWBAH
Repentance
Revealed at Madinah

    The surah begins with Allah disowning the polytheists. The surah is, therefore, also known as “Bara’ah” (Disowning). The surah then mentions the sanctity of the sacred months, the treaty with the polytheists, and the necessity of observing said treaty as long as the polytheists do not go back on it. If they do, it is incumbent on Muslims to wage war against them.
    The surah then makes it clear that the essence of getting near to Allah is belief in Him. Such belief is never complete unless the Muslim holds Allah and His Messenger dearer than anything else. Allah also mentions that greed for power drives away victory; He refers to the state of the Muslims in the Battle of Hunayn.
    In this surah Allah prohibits the polytheists from entering the Inviolable Mosque because they are impure. The surah also states the necessity of fighting the People of the Book until they pay the jizyah (head tax) in submission. It shows the number of the sacred months and the necessity of going to battle at every call with no delay. The surah then refers to those who hinder others from going to battle, the conditions of the hypocrites who seek discord every time going to battle is called for, and the hypocrites’ dealing with the believers in peace and war.
    The surah includes the decisive penalty for hypocrisy, namely that the Prophet does not pray the funeral prayer over any of the hypocrites. Allah then mentions the excuses that justify not going to battle and makes clear the status of those desert Arabs (living around and near Madinah) who showed a false desire to embrace Islam, or who were subjected to its ruling after it had become powerful. 
    After this, Allah mentions the conditions of people regarding belief and the story of the Mosque of Harm that was built by the hypocrites to harm the status of the mosque built by Allah’s Messenger. Allah then mentions the characteristics of true believers and the repentance of those who lingered behind and did not join the Messenger and Allah’s acceptance of their repentance. The surah describes people regarding their reception of the Qur’anic verses when they are revealed. Allah concludes the surah by stating that He chose Muhammad for the Message, that He does not allow any hardship to befall those to whom Muhammad was sent, that He is All-Kind and Ever-Merciful to them, and that He will be sufficient for Muhammad if the people turn their backs on him.
    
    1. Allah and His Messenger declare explicitly that the covenant made between you Muslims and the idolaters who break their vows is, as of today, rendered void.
    2. Nonetheless, you disbelievers may move freely in the land as you please. You will be well secured against all assaults for a period of four months. But you must realize that you will not be defiant to Allah, and you cannot escape His sure watch and power. He will disgrace the disbelievers and put them to shame.
    3. On the day of the great occasion of hajj, Allah and His Messenger declare to mankind that they are under no obligation to the polytheists who break their vows and do not honor their treaties. And if you polytheisits repent regarding your hostile course of action, you will advantage yourselves of Allah’s grace. But if you are deaf, then you must realize that you will not be defiant to Allah nor escape His sure watch. And announce, Muhammad, to these disbelievers that they must expect Allah’s torment laid upon the damned.
    4. But exempt from this immediate liability are those of the polytheists with whom you Muslims have concluded a peace treaty that they have honored and, for the meantime, have refrained from helping others against you. It is incumbent on you to fulfill your obligation to them until they have reached the end of the term of security. Allah likes those who obey Him and piously revere Him as He deserves.
    5. When the four sacred months of grace have expired, then kill the vicious polytheists wherever you find them: seize them, besiege them, and lie in ambush for them everywhere. But should they repent, engage in prayer and give zakah (poor-dues), then leave them go their way. Allah is All-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    6. If anyone of the polytheists seeks your protection, Muhammad, then protect him and grant him asylum till he hears Allah’s words. Escort him to where he will be out of harm’s way. They are people deficient in knowledge of Islam.
    7. How could the polytheists honor their covenant with Allah and with His Messenger? Yet you must honor your obligation to those of them with whom you concluded a covenant at the Inviolable Mosque. As long as they honor their part, you will have to honor yours. Allah likes those pious who obey Him and honor their pledges.
    8. How can these polytheists impel themselves to a good disposition toward you people when they entertain evil thoughts of you? If they get an advantage and prevail over you, they will be, totally disregarding the ties of kinship as well as their obligations. They talk sweetly to you, but all the while their hearts bode ill, and most of them are, indeed, immoral.
    9. These people have exchanged the truth of Allah’s revelations for the vanity of the fleeting and ephemeral world and obstructed the way to the path of Allah. Evil, indeed, is what they do.
    10. They totally disregard their ties of kinship and their obligations. Their disposition reflects their transgressive infirmities.
    11. If they repent and perform regular prayer and give zakah, then they are your co-religionists and an integral part of your brotherhood. We expound Our revelations and render Our words readily understood by people who know.
    12. But should they breach their oaths after their covenant to you, and continue to assail your religion with abusive language, then you must fight against the ringleaders of bigotry, for then they will have proved themselves false to the oaths. They may with such calculated punishment desist, for their own advantage, from their hostile course of action.
    13. These polytheists were they who frequently disregarded their treaties; they purposed to oust the Messenger from Makkah, and they were the aggressors following the covenant into which both of you entered. Do you fear them, when it is Allah whom you should fear if, indeed, you are sincere believers?
    14. Fight them the good fight of faith; Allah will make them suffer at your hands and put them to shame, and make you victorious. This victory is intended to heal the ill, implicit and explicit, in the hearts of the believers.
    15. It is also intended to free the hearts of the faithful from rage and to free them from irritation and to return them to their settled calm. Allah accepts the repentance of whom He wills. He is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    16. Do not reckon, Muslims, that you will be left untested before Allah has yet to see that you have distinguished yourselves on every front or line of battle and that you have ground for sustaining your guardianship under no one besides Allah, His Messenger, and the believers? Allah is All-Knowing of all that you do. 
    17. It is never becoming for the idolaters to frequent the mosques of Allah bearing witness within themselves and explicitly of their disbelief in Allah. These are they whose deeds will be frustrated, and in Hell they will have eternal suffering.
    18. Indeed, the only people qualified to frequent the mosques of Allah are those who faithfully believe in Allah and in the Day of Judgment, who engage in the act of prayer and give zakah (poor-dues), and who fear no one but Allah. Such persons are expected to be among those who are truly-guided.
    19. Do you polytheists wish to make quenching the thirst of the pilgrims and attending to the Inviolable Mosque equal to belief in Allah and the Day of Judgment, and striving in the way of Allah? Such duties, as viewed by Him, are not comparable. Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness the wrongdoers, who wrong unjustly themselves by disbelief and wrong others by continually inflicting harm on them.
    20. Indeed, those who believed in Allah’s oneness and migrated to where they could best serve Him and strove for His cause with their wealth and their lives, are privileged by Allah with distinction in the scale and rank, and these are the triumphant who are bound to His care.
    21. Their endeavor in Allah’s cause has won His gratitude. He announces to them His mercy and blessings, His satisfaction, and His heavenly gardens of supreme bliss wherein they will pass to eternity.
    22. Their stay, in terms of state, is that of bliss, and in terms of time, is forever. And in Heaven’s realm Allah has magnificent rewards.
    23. O you who believe, do not favor the patronage of your fathers or of your brothers if they prefer disbelief to Allah’s faith and worship. And he who takes them as patrons, protectors, or guardians will be an unjust  wrongdoer.
    24. O Muhammad, say to those who believe, “If your fathers and your sons, your brothers and your wives, your kindred and the wealth you have gained, your trade that you fear may decline, and the comfortable abodes are regarded with more esteem and affection than Allah and His Messenger and than fighting in His way, then just you wait until Allah’s fitting judgment presents itself. Allah does not guide the immoral wrongdoers to His path of righteousness.”
    25. Allah has given you victory in many battles of belief against disbelief. And on the day of the Battle of Hunayn, when you presumed upon the great superiority of your numbers but it availed you nothing, and the earth, vast as it is, seemed straitened and constricted, then you shrank from danger and sought safety in flight.
    26. There and then Allah inspired serenity upon His Messenger and the faithful troops, and He sent down an invisible array of angels to assail your enemies, and there, He inflicted them with punishment in requital of their disbelief.
    27. Yet, thereafter Allah relents towards whom He wills, for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    28. O you who believe, the idolaters are impure. Accordingly, they must not be allowed near the Inviolable Mosque after this year (A.H. 9). Should you fear scarcity as a result of cutting commercial relations, Allah will make His grace abound in you, if He wills. He is indeed All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    29. O you who believe, fight those who deny Allah and the Day of Judgment among the People of the Book. They do not observe what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, nor do they conform to the true religion, Islam. Fight them until they pay the jizyah (head-tax) in acknowledgment of submission (to the state).
    30. The Jews distinguished `Uzair (Ezra) by calling him the son of Allah, and the Christians called the Masih son of Maryam (the Messiah son of Mary) the son of Allah—a fable resembling the falsehood spoken about Allah by those disbelievers who preceded them. Allah fights them and afflicts them with a malignant fate. How strongly diverged they are so as to cause what is false to be accepted as true!
    31. They took their rabbis and their monks as well as the Masih son of Maryam, as lords besides Allah; yet they have been commanded to worship Allah, the only god there is. Praise be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is far beyond all those they associate with Him.
    32. The disbelievers wish they could extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths. But Allah refuses to make His way restrained to send His illumination (the Qur’an) until enlightenment has prevailed, albeit this is hateful to those who refuse to acknowledge the truth.
    33. It is He Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and with the true faith and worship featured in the Qur’an, and the unclouded and authoritative Islam, which Allah will cause to prevail over all religion, albeit this is hateful to those who associate other deities with Allah.
    34. O you who believe, many of the rabbis and the monks eat the people out of their wealth, take advantage of people’s trust, and obstruct the way to Islam. Those who pile up gold and silver and do not pay their zakah (poor-dues)—announce to them, Messenger, the anticipation of a grievous torment. 
    35. One day these precious metals will be melted by the heat of the Fire of Hell and their foreheads, their sides, and their backs will be branded with them. They will be told, “This is what you hoarded and denied the poor of their right. Now, you taste the torment that is laid on the damned in requital of what you have hoarded.”
    36. The calendar put by Allah when He created the universe divides the year into twelve months, four of which—Rajab, Thul-Qi`dah, Thul-Hijjah, and Muharram—are prohibiting fighting. Therefore, do not wrong yourselves during these months by waging wars, nor discredit yourselves by abstaining from fighting them if they wage war on you. And fight the disbelievers in the whole as they fight you in the whole, and realize that Allah upholds those who are pious to Him.
    37. To transpose a sacred month in favor of another month is to add to disbelief. Such a practice as adopted by the disbelievers made them sink deeper into misguidance. They permit it one year and forbid it another year so as to make lawful what Allah has prohibited and arrange them suitably to the number ordained by Allah. Thus were the disbelievers enticed by their deeds of evil and iniquity. Allah never guides to His path of righteousness the disbelievers who persist in their disbelief.
    38. O you who believe, what ails you that you are indisposed to action? When the Messenger told you to strive in the way of Allah, you clung heavily to the ground. Have you become worldly-minded and do you prefer life here to that in the Hereafter? But how little are the material things of enjoyment here as compared with those in the Hereafter!
    39. Unless you respond favorably to the Messenger’s call to serve Allah and march forth, Allah will afflict you with a severe torment and replace you with others who are responsive. Your indisposition to His purpose will not harm Him in the least. Allah has power over all things.
    40. If you do not vindicate the Messenger in the accomplishment of Allah’s purpose, you must realize that Allah will vindicate him exactly as He made him triumph over his enemies (the Quraysh) who plotted against his life. The Messenger left home with no one but his companion Abu Bakr. In the cave of Thawr (three miles from Makkah) where they hid, the Messenger said to his companion, who feared for the Prophet’s life, “Rest assured and do not grieve; Allah is with us.” There and then Allah sent down His serenity and tranquility to His Messenger, and the thoughts were conveyed to the other, and He upheld him and supported him with an invisible array of angels. There, Allah made what the disbelievers had forged in their hearts fail to accord with what their tongues vented. Thus, what they declared in words was debased, and the Word of Allah is as always at the top. Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    41. O you who believe, march out, each in his capacity, lightly armed and heavily armed. Every hand must be open to contribute something to the common purpose, and strive in the cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives. Such a campaign is charitable for you if only you knew (it helps you prevail and confirm Allah’s faith and worship).
    42. If the expedition had been a short distance and if they had been confident that their march would achieve its worldly end, they would have followed you. But the distance disenchanted them and appeared toilsome. They will swear to you, Messenger, that they would have gone out with you to fight if they had been able to do so. Their lying and hypocrisy cause their own perdition. And Allah knows that they are liars and He will punish them for it.
    43. Allah be clement towards you, Muhammad! Why did you grant them permission to be among the stay-at-home before sifting them to find out the truthful and expose those who were lying?
    44. Never will those who truly believe ask you to exempt them from this obligation. They feel they must march out as ordained by Allah. They purpose to strive in His cause, which is their cause, with their wealth and their lives. Allah is fully aware of the pious believers. 
    45. Those who ask you to exempt them are those who do not truly believe in Allah and the Last Day. And in their uncertainty they waver.
    46. If they had been willing to march out, they would have made all preparations necessary for overpowering the assailant. But being fully aware of their innermost thoughts, Allah hated their participation in the campaign and discouraged them, and it was said, "You should join the stay-at-home.
    47. If they had joined you (in battle), they would have caused discord and hastened to sow dissension and sedition among you. And among you are attentive hearers who listen to them. Allah is All-Knowing of all the unjust hypocrites.
    48. They had made it their aim to sow sedition and discord. They upset your ordinary pursuits of life, Messenger, as well as your divine course of action. But great is truth and it did prevail, and there did Allah’s word assume the top, in spite of their opposition and their hatred.
    49. Among them is he who says to you, Muhammad, “Exempt me from this obligation and do not let me fall into temptation.” (This is in reference to the expedition to Tabuk, which was close to Syria. The men would thus be exposed to the Syrian women, who were supposedly a source of temptation.) Indeed, they have fallen into temptation and have caused themselves to fall into persecution by Heaven, and Hell is encompassing the disbelievers on the Last Day.
    50. When good fortune comes your way, be it through victory or spoils of war, they become vexed and grieved. But if misfortune befalls you, they say, “With prudent foresight, we exercised caution to provide against misfortunes and turmoil.” And they turn their backs and go away exulting.
    51. Say to them, Messenger, “Nothing of good fortune or misfortune befalls us but has been divinely assessed and justly determined by Allah. He is our Patronizer, and in Allah should those who believe put their trust.
    52. Say to them, “You have no right to anticipate anything to befall us but only one of two advantageous (rewards): martyrdom or victory. As for you, we do anticipate an inevitable torment from Allah or at our hands. Therefore, await the event that will come in due time, and we are also waiting.”
    53. O Messenger, say to these hypocrites, “You may spend as much as you like, willingly or unwillingly, but your contributions will never be accepted. You are people who are immoral.”
    54. The reason for refusing to accept their contributions is their unforgivable grave offense against Allah. They disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger; they perform their act of prayer with a lazy attitude, and they spend in Allah’s service with hate and reluctance.
    55. Do not let the splendor of their riches and their progeny astonish you. Allah intends to make these attributes the cause of their torment here through unrewarded unrest and anxiety, and their selves will be caught by death in a state of disbelief.
    56. And they swear by Allah that they are with you when, in fact, they are not. They are people who display ignoble terror in the face of danger, and they try to assure their belief through false oaths.
    57. If they can find a shelter or a cavern or a hole for concealment in the ground, they will withdraw hastily to it.
    58. Among those hypocrites are some who question your justice in the way you distribute the alms and spoils, and they try to defame you. If you give them the share they like, they are satisfied with you; and if they do not have a good share in what is distributed, they express their wrath of you.
    59. If they had been satisfied with what Allah and His Messenger gave them of alms and spoils, and said “So be it; we are contented with Allah. His bounty will abound in us directly and through His Messenger, and to Him we implore for homage,” it would have been to their advantage.
    60. Donations are due only to the following: the poor who are destitute of means of livelihood; the indigent who are in temporary distress due to sickness or disability, those who are employed as collectors and administrators thereof; those who have just reconciled themselves with their own hearts and with Allah; those in bondage who are eager to buy their freedom; those in debt who are genuinely unable to pay what is owed to others; the support of the cause of Allah; and the wayfarer who does not have the means for transportation. This is an obligation incumbent on Muslims and due to Allah; and Allah is Ever-Knowing, Ever-Wise.
    61. Among those hypocrites are also those who deliberately harm the Prophet and accuse him of attentively listening to all that is being said, be it true or false. Say to them, “He listens graciously only to all that is truthful; he believes in Allah, he believes those who believe, to whom he is Allah's given mercy.” Indeed, those who hurt the Messenger of Allah will suffer a painful torment.
    62. They linger behind, do not join you in battle, and offer you some excuse to satisfy you and affirm it by swearing by Allah so that you may accept it, when it is Allah and His Messenger that they should satisfy if they are true believers.
    63. Do they not know that he who disbelieves or contravenes against Allah and His Messenger will suffer the fire of Hell, and this is, indeed, disgrace to the extreme.
    64. Those hypocrites ridicule the Messenger among themselves and are afraid of being found out, fearing that a verse should be revealed that would betray their real character and their ill-natured hearts, which they wish to be kept secret. Say to them, “Hold whom you will in ridicule. Allah will expose your attributes that you always beware of and hope would be kept secret.”
    65. And if you should ask them, O Messenger, after their real nature has been betrayed, why they plunged into defaming religion and ridiculing Allah and His signs, they would say, “We always plunge into worldly talk and play.” Say to them, “Do you make Allah, His revelations, and His Messenger the object of play and laugh them to mockery?
    66. “Do not vindicate your grievous wrong now by an excuse. You have turned renegades.” If We forgive some of you because of their true repentance, We will torment others who are criminals and persist in disbelief and hypocrisy and in harming the Messenger and the believers.
    67. The hypocrites, men and women, are alike in that they enjoin what is evil and leave and forbid what is just and right. They keep their hands tightly shut, unwilling to spend in divine service, and fail to remember Allah. And by consequence, Allah has neglected them and did not guide them. Indeed, the hypocrites are immoral and disobedient to Allah.
    68. Allah has promised the hypocrites and the disbelievers the fire of Hell, wherein they will eternally suffer. It is their Reckoning. Allah has cursed them, and they will suffer perpetual torment on the Day of Judgment.
    69. You hypocrites are similar to those who preceded you. They were mightier than you are, and they lived in greater affluence of wealth and progeny. They enjoyed all that afforded pleasure and they neglected all that was due to Allah. Similarly, you enjoy all that affords pleasure in the same way as those who preceded you; you plunged into evil and injustice the same as they did. You and such persons are those whose hopes will be doomed to disappointment and whose deeds will be frustrated here and in the Hereafter, and all of you are losers.
    70. Have the hypocrites and the disbelievers not been informed of what became of their predecessors, the people of Nuh (Noah) and those of `Ad, the people of Thamud and those of Ibrahim (Abraham), the people of Shu`ayb, and those of Lut (Lot)? All of them received messengers who brought them divine illumination and evidences, but they disbelieved, were punished, and destroyed. Never did Allah do them injustice, but it was they who wronged themselves by their disbelief (and thus they deserved Allah’s torment).
    71. And those of the men and the women who believe are patrons of each other. They enjoin what is just and right and forbid what is evil; they faithfully and regularly perform prayers on time and pay the Zakah; and they obey Allah and His Messenger. These will Allah have mercy on them. Indeed Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    72. Allah has promised the believers, men and women, eternal bliss in Gardens in Heaven beneath which rivers run. Allah has also promised them beautiful mansions in the Gardens of Eden, and, above all, they enjoy Allah’s grace, which is, indeed, the supreme triumph.
    73. O Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and be harsh with them. Their abode is Hell, and evil indeed is their destiny.
    74. The hypocrites swear to you, Messenger, that they never spoke slander against you, when in fact they uttered the word emblematic of disbelief after belief. And instead of being grateful for your presence in Madinah—which made Heaven endow them with prosperity, justice, and suppression of selfishness—they attempted to requite Allah’s grace by plotting against you. Nonetheless, if they repent, it will be to their advantage. But should they turn away and turn a deaf ear, Allah will put them to the painful torment here and in the Hereafter, and they will find no patron or protector on earth.
    75. Among the hypocrites were some who vowed to Allah and pledged to Him that if His grace abounded in them, they would give in benevolence and spend in divine service and be of those whose deeds are righteous.
    76. And when He bestowed on them of His bounty, they were niggardly and did not fulfill their promise. They turned away from benevolence and turned a deaf ear to the Word of Allah.
    77. Consequently, Allah made hypocrisy overtake their hearts until the day they will die and be in His presence. This is because of the violation of their pledge and their intentional assertion of what is false.
    78. Do they not know that Allah knows the thoughts and feelings that their hearts store and what they keep secret and what they say in their private conferences, and that He is All-Knowing of everything?
    79. They spoke maliciously of the rich believers who give charity, and of those who are not rich who contribute a part of what they earn by labor. They laughed them to scorn. Allah has mocked them and uncovered their wicked attributes and destined them to a painful torment in the Hereafter. 
    80. You may invoke Allah’s forgiveness on their behalf, Muhammad, or you may not; it is one and the same. Even if you invoke Allah’s forgiveness on their behalf seventy times, He will never forgive them. They denied Allah and His Messenger and insolently and defiantly disregarded Allah and His Messenger. Allah does not guide the immoral to His path of righteousness.
    81. These hypocrites, the stay-at-home, rejoiced for remaining behind, leaving the Messenger and his available troops to set forth for the battle, and they hated to participate in the expedition. They disliked greatly to strive with their wealth and sacrifice their lives in the way of Allah, and they incited others not to join the expedition in the scorching heat of the summer. Say to them, Messenger, “The heat of Hell is far hotter and severer than what you fear, if they could comprehend.”
    82. They may laugh the believers to scorn. They will laugh only for a short time, but they will weep much. They will weep their fill and expend their life in Hell in weeping in requital of the evil they committed.
    83. And if Allah destines you, Muhammad, to return safe from battle and the occasion arises for another expedition and any group of these hypocrites asks your permission to join you, simply refuse and say to them, “Never will you join me in any expedition nor will you ever join me in fighting any enemy. You rejoiced when you stayed at home on the first occasion, with no excuse beforehand or repentance afterward, and therefore, you will again join those who remain behind.”
    84. Nor should you, Muhammad, pray for any of them who dies, nor attend his burial rites. These are people who disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger and who died as immorals.
    85. Nor should you let the splendor of their riches and their progeny make you admire that. Allah intends to make these attributes the cause of their suffering here below through torment and anxiety, and their selves will be taken while they are captivated by disbelief, and thus they will have lost here and hereafter.
    86. And when a surah is revealed to you enjoining true belief in Allah and commanding strife together with His Messenger in His cause, you see the affluent and the physically able among them requesting exemption, saying to you, “Leave us with those remaining behind, the excused stay-at-home in Madinah.”
    87. Satisfied to remain behind with the stay-at-home (women, invalids, and children), their hearts have been impressed with fear and hypocrisy, and, therefore, they do not apprehend the dignity involved in following the Messenger in strife (and the bliss they will enjoy in the Hereafter).
    88. But the Messenger and those who followed him strove with their wealth and their lives to fulfill their obligation to Allah and to make His word the uppermost. These are the recipients of Allah’s grace and of all that is good to attain, and it is these whom Heaven will make prosperous.
    89. Allah has prepared for them in His Heaven, Gardens of unsurpassed beauty beneath which rivers flow, and this is, indeed, a magnificent triumph.
    90. Then there came a group of the desert Arabs, full of excuses, to claim exemption, while those of them who apparently conformed to Islam but deep in their heart lied to  Allah and His Messenger, simply sat at home. Those of them who deny Allah will be put to a painful torment.
    91. Absolved from warfare are the weak and the sick and those who are indigent, lacking the necessities of life, provided that they give sincere advice for Allah and His Messenger, for the sincere will always find acceptance with Allah. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    92. Absolved also are those who come to you, Messenger, sincerely intending to join your expedition, and you tell them, “I do not have the means to carry you to the battlefield,” and they weep their fill due to their disappointment. They are grieved at heart over their inability to win the honor of striving in the way of Allah.
    93. But the blame and punishment are indeed incurred by those who are rich and equipped yet make excuses to claim exemption and do not contribute to Allah’s cause. They are satisfied to remain behind together with the stay-at-home. Allah has impressed their hearts with dullness of comprehension, and therefore, they do not know the grave consequence, here and hereafter, of remaining behind.
    94. And when you return from battle, they apologize to you for their offense. Say to them, Messenger, “Do not offer defensive arguments because we will not believe you. Allah has informed us of your disposition and has uncovered your lies. And Allah and His Messenger will watch over your innocence and follies, then you will be sent back to Him Who is All-Knowing of the invisible and of the visible. There and then He will inform you of what you have done (and will punish you accordingly).”
    95. They will swear to you by Allah when you return to them from battle that what they offered you as a reason for claiming exemption was justified; they mean to be exculpated so that you do not censure them. Avoid them and have nothing to do with them. They are an abomination and defiled by sin. Their abode will be Hell in requital of the evil acts they committed.
    96. They swear to you to approve of them. But even if you do, you must realize that Allah never approves of people who grow daily more and more wicked, and that your approval is of no avail to them.
    97. The desert Arabs (Bedouins) are more addicted to disbelief and hypocrisy; they are the most fitted to be ignorant and unaware of the divine laws sent down to His Messenger. And Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    98. Among these desert Arabs are some who consider spending in the cause of Allah a useless expenditure and a great loss. They pore over evil and wish that you Muslims would be befallen with a misfortune. May Allah afflict them with a disaster. Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    99. Nonetheless, among the desert Arabs are some who believe in Allah and acknowledge the truth of the Day of Judgment. They look upon what they spend in His cause as offerings bringing them closer to Him and to His Messenger to invoke Allah’s mercy and blessings on their behalf, for the invocation of the Messenger is indeed a great offering bringing them closer to their aim. Allah will extend His mercy to them. Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    100. And the foremost to embrace Islam who emigrated with the Messenger, the 'Ansar who welcomed them and gave them aid, and those who followed their example are the recipients of Allah’s satisfaction. Allah is well satisfied with them and they with Him. He has prepared for them Gardens of unsurpassed beauty with rivers flowing beneath its trees, wherein they will have passed to eternity, and this is a magnificent triumph.
    101. Some of the desert Arabs round about you and some of the people of Madinah are hypocrites; to all of them hypocrisy is a way of life. They are so clever in concealing their disposition that you do not know them, but We do know them. We will make them suffer double, once by defeat and another by being exposed to the tremendous torment laid upon the damned.
    102. There are others who have harmed you then confessed their faults; there is much good in them albeit they succumbed to evil. Some of their mixed deeds were good and others were evil. Allah may relent towards their offense and accept true repentance. He is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    103. O Messenger, take alms from their wealth, an offering to set them upon the course of purity and to cleanse them. Pray Allah to forgive them; your prayer is sereneness for them. Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    104. Do they not know that Allah is He Who alone accepts sincere repentance and that He accepts offerings and acts of charity? It is only He Who is All-Gracious in accepting repentance, and He is Ever-Merciful.
    105. Say to the people, Muhammad, “Do (right) deeds. Allah sees your doings and so will His Messenger and the believers. Then at the end all of you will be brought back to Him, The All-Knowing of all the thoughts that the hearts store and of what you declare. There and then He will reward or punish you for all you did.”
    106. There are others, the stay-at-home who are not hypocrites. They are held in suspense for an expected decision—Allah may torment them or relent towards their offense. And Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    107. Those who built a mosque professedly from religious motives when, in fact, it was built from evil motives—to vex the Muslims, to establish disbelief, to be a mere nest of the conspirators against Islam, to cause dissent among the Muslims and set them at variance, and to be an outpost for the warriors who fought against Allah and His Messenger before—they swear to you, Muhammad, that they only mean good, but Allah knows well and bears witness that they are liars.
    108. O Messenger, never pray in it. A mosque built on piety and obedience to Allah and with the intention of serving Allah’s purpose from the first day—such as the mosque of Quba’—merits visiting for the purpose of worship. Therein are people who aspire to physical purity and the purity of their hearts. And Allah likes those who are physically and morally pure.
    109. Is he who has built his structure on a foundation of piety and the gratification of Allah better, or the one who has built his structure on a foundation of hypocrisy and disbelief—like a building founded on an undermined sand cliff that collapses and crumbles away in the fire of Hell? And Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness those who persisted in being unjust to themselves through disbelief.
    110. Their building will not cease to be the cause of distress to their hearts and of alarm and suspicion to their hearts until the day their hearts are crushed with sorrow or repentance, and the day they die. And Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    111. Allah has bought from those who believe their lives and their wealth in exchange for Paradise. They strive in His cause whether they win victory or are martyred in His cause. It is a solemn promise that Allah has pledged in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]), the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]), and the Qur’an, and who can honor and fulfill his promise better than Allah? Therefore, you may rejoice, O believers, at the bargain you have made to your advantage; this is indeed the magnificent triumph.
    112. Those who have sold themselves in exchange for Paradise have the distinguished attributes of:
* Repentance: They humbly repent.
* Thankfulness: They worship and praise Him under all circumstances.
* Fasting: They fast as a religious observance and go out in the way of Allah; and by way of penitence they abstain from sin.
* Kneeling: They bow down and prostrate  to Allah in supplication and for doing homage and honor to Him.
* Righteousness: They enjoin what is just and right and forbid what is evil.
* Observance of the divine law: They solemnly observe Allah’s laws and their deeds accord with Allah’s blessed word and ordinances.
    For this, Muhammad, announce blissful tidings to those who believe.
    113. It does not conform with reason that the Prophet and those who believe invoke Allah’s mercy on those polytheists who died in disbelief in Allah, even though they be of the nearest kin, especially after they have been assured by Allah that such persons are destined to the abode in Hell.
    114. The invocation made by Ibrahim (Abraham) on behalf of his father was in fulfillment of a promise he had made to him. But when he realized that his father was an avowed enemy to Allah until his death, he declared his innocence of him and of his fatherhood. Indeed, Ibrahim constantly implored Allah with touching entreaties, and he was forbearing.
    115. Nor would Allah ascribe error to people after He has guided them to His path of righteousness until He has explicitly made known to them what they must avoid but they did not. Allah is, indeed, All-Knowing of everything.
    116. To Allah belongs the absolute sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; He gives life and causes death. And besides Allah, you people have no patron, nor is there anyone who can vindicate you.
    117. Allah has relented towards the Prophet and to his troops who followed him at the hour of distress throughout the difficult days of the expedition (Tabuk) when some of them lost heart through incipient weakness and were about to quit the field. Allah relented towards them; He sustained them after He had confirmed their true inclination and the truth of their firm disposition. He was Compassionate to them and, indeed, He is Ever-Merciful.
    118. As for the three affluent and able men who were boycotted and excluded from the life of the community to the end that, vast as it is, the earth seemed constricted, they realized through self-reproach that they would not and could not flee from Allah but could find solace in coming back to Him. He pardoned their offense so that they would stand repentant. Allah is Ever-Relenting, Who accepts repentance and atonement, and He is Ever-Merciful.
    119. O you who believe, entertain the profound piety due to Allah and be an integral part of those who are strongly and habitually disposed to tell the truth and whose words accord with their deeds.
    120. It was not excusable that the Muslim residents of Madinah and those of the desert Arabs round about them deserted the Messenger in his expedition and remained behind, nor was there any cause inducing them to prefer their own lives to his. The conclusion of all this is that any thirst, fatigue, or hunger they suffer in Allah’s cause, or any scheme they design to anger the disbelievers and obtain an advantage over them (whether they win or lose) is credited to them as a righteous deed. Allah does not annul what fair-doers are entitled to reap from deeds of wisdom and piety.
    121. Nor do they spend in divine service little or much, nor journey across a valley to strive in the cause of Allah but it is credited to their account so that He requites them for every deed at the best of what they accomplished.
    122. Nor should those who believe go forth all at once to the Messenger, but only a group from each community should go to learn from him jurisprudence and convey such divine knowledge to their people and warn them when they return to them against disobedience to Allah.
    123. O you who believe, wage war against the disbelievers who dwell in the adjacent towns round about you; they are a source of danger to you. Let them feel that you are rigorous, but you must realize that Allah upholds those who are pious to Him.
    124. When a surah is sent down, some of the hypocrites insolently and mockingly say to each other, “Whose heart among you has this surah increased in belief?” Indeed, those who believe are receptive to divine knowledge. It gives them moral support and confidence and increases their belief. Their hearts become impressed with religious virtues. Stirred by emotion, they rejoice beyond a common joy.
    125. Whereas a surah adds doubt to those whose ill-natured hearts reflect the morbidity inherent in their innermost being, and it gives them occasion to uncertainty and increases the degree of their abomination. They will die in disbelief.
    126. Do the hypocrites not perceive what is below the surface? They are subjected to a severe test and a strain, and they are put to straits once or twice every year that they may, it is hoped, stand repentant. But they neither repent nor reflect.
    127. And when a surah is sent down, they look at one another and say, “Does anyone see you?” and then they take their leave. Allah has turned their hearts and thoughts away from the truth and closed their hearts’ ears to admonition! They lack diligence and they are people who have no comprehension (of Allah nor of the speech of reason narrated by His Messenger).
    128. O people, there has come to you a Messenger raised in your midst and related to you by kinship. He is grieved at heart to see you be destroyed by your iniquities. You are his object of care and deep concern with view to guiding you to the path of righteousness; and he is Compassionate, tender, and merciful to those who believe.
    129. Nonetheless, Muhammad, if they should close their hearts’ ears and direct their thoughts away from you, then simply invoke Allah thus: “Enough is Allah for me; in Him do I find the answer to my purpose, my hopes, and my needs. There is no god but Him. In Him I trust and He is the Absolute Sovereign of the magnificent throne of dominion, authority, grace and mercy.”
