SURAH 10
YUNUS
Jonah
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts by pointing out the rank of the Glorious Qur’an and what the polytheists say about the Prophet. The surah then mentions the universe and Allah’s signs in it, reward on the Day of Judgment, and the decree of Allah as regards the disbelievers. It denounces their belief. The surah also deals with the position of people in affliction and affluence, the absolute power of Allah over everything, and the idols’ lack of power to effect anything. It challenges the disbelievers to produce a surah like it. The surah includes a strong threat of torment from Allah. It also tells of the conditions of people’s selves and Allah’s vigilant watch over their deeds. Then the surah moves on to comfort the Prophet for the pain he feels as a result of the people’s disbelief, in addition to providing decisive evidence that condemns them. This comforting comes in the mention of the stories of previous prophets with their people: Nuh (Noah), Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) with Pharaoh and the Children of Isra'il, and Yunus (Jonah), after whom the surah is named. Finally, the surah turns to the Prophet to make the lesson comprehensive.
    
   
    1. A (alif). L (lam). R (ra). The surah opens with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated. These words—the preceding and those to follow—are divine verses that constitute the Qur’an, verses containing wisdom and divine knowledge that are beneficial to people in matters of their religion and worldly life.
    2. Is it a wonder in peoples’ sight that We reveal to one of them with such divine knowledge to warn them and all people of the danger of denying Allah, and to announce blissful tidings to those who believe in Him, that Heaven will set them on their feet secure (and esteemed high)? Yet the disbelievers dispute the facts, saying that this man (Muhammad) is simply an evident sorcerer.
    3. Allah your Lord is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days (determined by His own unit of time). Then levelled He Himself on the Throne (of supremacy and dominion). He conducts the Command, and no intercessor is permitted to intercede on behalf of anyone without His permission. This is Allah your Lord; you had better worship Him, regard Him with extreme respect and devotion, and adore Him with appropriate acts and rites. Can you not remember?
    4. To Him will be your return at the end of your life here below. His promise is absolutely true. He started creation and He continues to create and re-create, and on the Day of Resurrection all will be created anew. Then He recompenses with equity those who recognized Him and obeyed Him, adored Him with appropriate acts and rites, and vested their deeds with wisdom and piety. He requites those disbelievers who denied Him with what is commensurate with their evil deeds. Their thirst will be quenched with scalding water, and their faculties of physical perception will have painful torment as a result of their disbelief.
    5. It is He Who made the sun emit illumination and the moon derive its light from it (and reflect it to the earth). He determined the divisions of the ecliptic for the moon to occupy them on successive days and present its phases according to the extent of its illumination. This helps you to know the number of the years and reckon the time occupied by the sun in its apparent passage through the zodiac and the period of the earth’s revolution round the sun forming a natural unit of time, so that you may be able to compute time and determine it by calculation. Never did Allah create this and bring it about but (for a serious end) with the truth. Thus Allah expounds His signs and renders His words readily understood by those who know.
    6. Indeed, in the variation in duration besides the constant alternation and succession of the night and the day, in addition to all that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, are evident signs of Allah’s omnipotence and authority to people who are pious to Him as He deserves.
    7. Indeed, those who do not hope for meeting with Allah, and who are content with life here and rest composed and satisfied with it and who are oblivious of Our signs betokening omnipotence and authority, are heedless.
    8. Such persons have their abode is the Fire in requital of what they used to earn.
    9. But those who believe and do deeds with wisdom and piety will be recipients of Allah’s mercy and grace. Allah guides them along the belief proceeding from their innermost being to His path of righteousness ending in Heaven’s realm, where rivers run beneath them in the Gardens of eternal bliss.
    10. Their plea there will be “All Extolment be to Allah!” Their hearty greeting there will be “Peace,” and the conclusion of their prayer will express their thoughts thus: “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds!”
    11. If Allah were to hasten His response to people who deserve evil as they invoke Him to hasten His response to confer on them what is charity, their term would be now. But We leave those who do not entertain the thought of the Day of Judgment and allow them free action to commit themselves to the loss in the maze of blundering.
    12. When man is touched with adversity, he invokes Us for relief, reclining on his side or sitting or standing; and when We lift what was burdensome to him, he passes heedless of Allah as if he never invoked Him to relieve him from an adversity. Thus are the extravagant allured by what they were doing.
    13. Destruction and perishing of preceding generations were events (you people must have heard of). They were unjust. They received messengers with evident warnings, but they refused to believe their messages and to the divine enlightenment. Thus do We requite the criminal people.
    14. Then We brought you people into existence and made you the successors to see how you would act and whether or not you would do (like people of sense).
    15. When Our Verses emitting thoughts of evidence and divine enlightenment are recited to the polytheists, they, who do not hope for meeting with Us, react with revulsion and they say, “Bring a Qur’an different from this or substitute the words we do not like with others to our taste.” Say to them, Muhammad, “It is not within my power to make exchanges of my own accord; I only follow all that is revealed to me (and I do not dare to disobey Allah my Lord) for the penalty will be torment on a Momentous Day.”
    16. Say to them, “If Allah had decided, He would not have sent down a Book and I would not have recited it to you nor would He have made you realize with authoritative directions as to action. I have lingered in your midst for years before it was revealed to me. Can you not consider?”
    17. Who then is more unjust of actions than he who fabricates lies against Allah or denies His revelations and signs demonstrating His omnipotence and authority? Indeed the criminals will never prosper.
    18. They worship apart from Allah what will never hurt them or profit them, and they say that such objects of worship will serve as their intercessors pleading on their behalf with Allah. Say to them, Muhammad, “Do you inform Allah of what He does not know either in the heavens or in the earth?” Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely exalted far beyond those they associate with Him.
    19. Mankind were but one single nation, then they differed among themselves in opinion, and they were all set at variance. Had it not been for Allah’s word proclaimed beforehand to delay the decision on matters of doubt and dispute among them and to put punishment in respite, their differences would have been settled.
    20. The polytheists say, “If only a sign other than the Qur’an were revealed to evince both his wisdom and the truth of his mission!” Say to them, Messenger, “The Unseen rests with Allah, Who knows the hidden, the unknown, and all that is destined to come. Therefore, you just wait, people; I will also await future events.”
    21. If We make mankind taste Our mercy and benediction following a touch of tribulation that has befallen them, and they direct their scheming against Our signs and revelations. Say to them, “Allah is swifter in scheming and indeed Our watchful guardian angels are committed to writing every scheming act that you do.”
    22. It is He who enables you to travel by land and sea, and when you are on board a ship and a favorable wind blows and the sails catch it and cause the vessel to move on the water, they exulted therein. But when the light wind changes to a gale and waves rise in billows tossing them in every direction and they think they are encompassed by danger on all sides, they invoke Allah, with a faithful common feeling of an intuitive recognition and belief in Him, to the end that if He delivers them from this catastrophe they will be indeed thankful.
    23. After He has delivered them from a sure disaster, they go unjustly and untruthfully. O you mankind who do not keep a promise or honor a vow, you had better realize that your inequity works against your own interest. The enjoyment in life here is evanescent and fleeting, and suddenly and soon enough you will be on your return to Us, and there and then We will inform you of all that you have done.
    24. Life here below is similar to the soil that is stirred to activity and swells up by absorption of the rainwater falling from the heaven. The water is absorbed by soil, causing plants—the food of both man and animal—to flourish and grow healthy and vigorous. The earth is rendered beautiful and pleasing to the senses, and the world becomes adorned and furnished with all that is ornamental. And when the earth’s inhabitants begin to think that it will always minister to their necessities and pleasure, there comes Our command to pass by night or by day to convince mankind that mortals do not command success, and We mow it down as if it never flourished the day before. Thus do We expound Our Signs and make Our words readily understood by people who meditate.
    25. Allah calls to a residence of peace, and He guides whom He decides to a straight path.
    26. He will requite those who vested their deeds with wisdom and piety with more than they expect, more than what is commensurate with their pious deeds. Their faces will never be overlaid with mournful and painful gloom, nor with humiliation and shame. These are the inmates of Paradise, wherein they will have passed to eternity.
    27. But for those who have earned odious deeds, the retribution for doing evil is evil of a like nature, in addition to the gloom that will overlay their faces. They will find no one to safeguard them against Allah’s punishment. Their faces will be coated with gloom, a painful distressing darkness they will have to assume, as if they were wearing a mold of a pitch-dark night. These are the inmates of the Fire, wherein they will have eternal suffering.
    28. The Day We muster them all together, We will address the associators thus: “Stop where you are, together with your partners whom you associated with Allah. You will hear His verdict and We keep them apart.” There and then those who were worshiped will say to their worshipers, “You did not really worship us.”
    29. And they add, “Allah is a witness of our actions and of your actions, and He corroborates our statement that we were heedless of the reverence and worship you paid to us.”
    30. There and then every self will become fully aware of all the pious deeds that it had advanced in life and of all the evil deeds that it had committed. Now they have been brought back to Allah their Lord, Who is the truth. Now they are renounced and forsaken by those whom they presumed shared divine nature with Allah.
    31. Say to the disbelievers, Muhammad, “Who supplies you with the provisions from the heavens and the earth and with the means of sustaining your lives? Who has control over the faculties of hearing and sight? Who causes the living to come out from the dead—such as plants from the earth—and causes the dead to fall from the living—such as causing a human to die? And Who conducts the Command of all affairs?” They will say, “Allah.” Then say to them, “Will you, then, not piously revere Him as He deserves?” 
    32. This, then, is Allah your Lord, Who is the truth. If you disregard the truth, there remains only false beliefs and departure from guidance. Therefore, how do you turn away from the truth?
    33. Thus was the word of your Lord (Allah) verified and proved true against the immoral who do not believe.
    34. Say to them, Messenger, “Is there anyone among your partners who you presume share divine nature with Allah who can begin creation from nothingness and reproduce it?” Then say to them, “Allah does start creation from nothingness and reproduces it, and on the Day of Resurrection He will create all anew; therefore, how could you be strongly diverged so as to believe a lie?”
    35. Say to them, Messenger, “Is there anyone among your partners who you presume share divine nature with Allah who can guide people to all truth?” Then say to them, “Allah guides to all truth; therefore, does He Who guides to all truth not merit to be followed, or he who cannot act as a guide and needs to be guided? How can you not judge the difference nor arrive at a sound judgment?”
    36. Most of them only follow the false suppositions. An opinion offered on presumptive evidence cannot overrule the truth. Allah is All-Knowing of all that they perform.
    37. Nor could this Qur’an be fabricated by anyone even if he is of singular ingenuity. Its inimitability, guidance, and precision betoken its divine nature and exclude all else besides Allah. It corroborates and authoritatively validates all the divine Books revealed before it and serves as an excellent interpretation expounding all the laws and ordinances revealed before it. It is undoubtedly revealed by Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    38. Or do they say, “Muhammad has fabricated it”? Say to them, “If you do believe I did, then produce one surah the like thereof, and call on all those besides Allah if indeed you are sincerely declaring the truth!”
    39. The fact is that they have belied the Qur’an without knowledge of its precepts, nor has its interpretation been given yet. Their predecessors belied similarly, and you can see the fatal consequence of the unjust wrongdoers.
    40. Nonetheless, among them are some who will believe in the Qur’an and give credence to it, while others simply refuse to believe in it. But Allah knows best the corruptors.
    41. However, if they should charge you, Messenger, with lying, just say to them, “I am responsible for my deeds and you are responsible for yours; you are innocent of my actions and I am innocent of yours. (And Allah will reward or punish each side accordingly.)”
    42. Among them are some who listen to your speech but they turn a deaf ear. Do you think you will be able to make the deaf to hear and they fail to consider?
    43. Among them are those who look at you. Would you be able to guide those who are blind, unable to perceive or apprehend? 
    44. Allah does not do injustice to anyone, not even in the slightest degree, but it is the people who unjustly wrong themselves (through preferring disbelief over belief).
    45. On the Day He musters them before Him for judgment, their life below, appearing to them, then, as no more than one hour of daylight, and they will be acquainted with each other. There and then, the losers will be those who denied the meeting with Allah, who did not do a righteous deed in their life below.
    46. We either show you in your lifetime, Messenger, some part of the promised punishment, or cause your death before you witness this punishment. Then to Us they are destined to return. Allah is Ever-Witness and He witnesses all that they do (and will punish them accordingly).
    47. To every nation a messenger has been sent (to admonish them to seek Allah and draw near to Him). And on the Day of Judgment every messenger will bear witness to his peoples’ response, and people will be justly judged, and no one will be done injustice.
    48. The disbelievers ask as usual, “When will the Day of Judgment be, if you (the Messenger and his followers) are declaring the truth?”
    49. Say to them, “I have no possess over what will befall me, be it bad or good, but everything happens as Allah decides.” And to every nation We have appointed a definite point of time, and when their time comes, they will never be able to postpone it or make it come earlier for one hour or infinitesimally less.
    50. Say to them, “What if Allah afflicts you with a torment by night or by day? What benefit would you (the criminals) derive from it that you wish it to be hastened on?”
    51. Is it only now that your torment is planted that you believe that it is reality, when you challenged it and wished it be hastened on?
    52. There and then the unjust will be told, “Now taste the eternal torment. Will you be recompensed but with what is commensurate with your evil deeds?”
    53. They ask you, Messenger, with a strong bias against resurrection and the Qur’an and its threat of committing the disbelievers to Hellfire, and they wonder if this be true. Say to them, “By Allah my Lord, it is indeed true, and you just cannot defy or escape the punishment Allah will lay on you.”
    54. If every unjust self possessed all the riches on earth, it would gladly pay it as ransom of its guilt with remorse and vain repentance when they are confronted with the horrid torment. There and then they are judged with equity, and no one will ever be unjustly wronged.
    55. Indeed, to Allah alone belongs all that exists in the heavens and on earth. The promise uttered by Allah is the truth, but most of the disbelievers do not seem to know this.
    56. He gives life and causes the moment of death, and to Him you are destined to go back.
    57. O you mankind, there has come to you from (Allah) your Lord an authoritative admonition exhorting you to recognize Him and urging you to do what is good and laudable. It serves as an incitement to worship no one but Him, and as a remedy for your breasts, and as a guide and mercy to those responsive believers.
    58. Say to them, Messenger, “You ought to exult at Allah’s grace and mercy manifested in the revelation of the Qur’an and the Law of Islam, which outweigh all the mundane things of this life that you gather.”
    59. Say to them, Messenger, “Do you see the provision that Allah has sent down for you of His bounty, and you took the liberty to classify them into the permissible and the prohibited? Was it Allah Who permitted you to do so, or do you fabricate to Allah falsehood?”
    60. What will you do then, on the Day of Resurrection, when you stand before Allah for fabricating lies? Indeed, Allah’s grace abounds in mankind, but most of them are not thankful for His bounty.
    61. We do know that you, the Messenger, have delivered the divine message, no matter whether you are engaged in the ordinary pursuits of life or in any other concern. And no matter how little or how much you recite of the Qur’an, and no matter what you mankind do, We are witnesses of it. We observe it as you busy yourselves for good or ill. Nor is there anything of an atom’s weight on earth or in heaven that escapes your Creator’s knowledge; there is nothing lesser or larger but it is recorded in an evident Book.
    
    62. Indeed, those whose hearts believe and obey are they who are safe and secure; they have no ground for alarm, nor will fear or dread fall upon them, nor will they come to grief because of anything they missed in life below (because Allah will reward them with more and greater things).
    63. They have faithfully believed in all that came from Allah, submitted to the truth, avoided evil acts, and were pious to Allah in all their deeds.
    64. The news of glad tidings is hereby announced to them in this world and in the world to come. The Speeches by Allah are not alterable (meaning that divine assurance of present and future blessing is irrevocable), and this is indeed magnificent triumph.
    65. Therefore, let not the disbelievers’ (vain and unreasonable) talk grieve you, Messenger. Might, honor, and omnipotence all belong to Allah; He is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    66. Indeed, all that exists in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah alone. Those disbelievers who associate other deities with Allah only follow conjectures and false suppositions. They, indeed, lie and hold as powerful that which has no control over itself.
    67. It is He (Allah) Who designated for you the night to take your natural rest and recuperate, and the day to have clear beholding of things and acquire experience of the activities of human existence. These are signs of Allah’s omnipotence and authority—phenomena that are appreciated and faithfully recognized by people who hear and listen to the truth.
    68. The disbelievers said, “Allah has taken a son.” Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely Independent and Affluent. To Him alone belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. Do you people have authority of your ugly and false allegation? Do you say against Allah what you do not know?
    69. Say to the disbelievers, “Those who fabricate against Allah lies will fare ill; they will go farther and fare worse and never prosper.”
    70. All that affords enjoyment here will not be for long  (life here is a scene of evanescent glory). Then back to Us they will return and We will afflict them with the torment laid upon those who disbelieved in Allah and disobeyed His commands.
    71. Recite to them, Messenger, the news of Nuh (Noah). He said to his people, “My people, if you feel that my station among you and my constant reminding you of Allah’s message and of your duty to Him are annoying you (and exhausting your patience), I trust in Allah (and no one can stop me from doing my duty to Him). Therefore, get together with your associates who you claim have authority over you besides Allah, and decide on a course of action that is not dimmed, and carry it out against me and give me no respite.
    72. “And if you fall deaf and turn away and disregard Allah’s commands, I do not charge you a price for imparting to you Allah’s revelations. My reward is only with Allah, and I have been commanded to be one of the Muslims.”
    73. Yet they charged him with lies, and, consequently, We delivered him by putting him and those who followed him on board ship (the ark) and made them the successors. We drowned those who cried lies to Our divine message and signs. Now look to see what was the fate of those who were warned of impending danger and refused to pay heed.
    74. In succession, We sent other messengers, each carrying a divine message to his people. They presented them with enough evidences to guide them into illumination and enlightenment. But they would not believe in what they had cried lies to earlier. Thus do We stamp upon the hearts of those who thrive on disobedience and transgression.
    75. Subsequently, We sent Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) to Pharaoh of Egypt and to his chiefs, to present them with Our divine message imparting intellectual enlightenment and illumination. But they turned indignant and were proud and were a people steeped in crime.
    76. They labeled the divine truth presented to them through Our Messenger Musa—namely, the stick that turned into a snake right before their eyes—as evident sorcery (displayed by a skilled sorcerer).
    77. Musa said, “Do you people call the truth presented to you sorcery? Is this sorcery? But indeed, never will the sorcerers to prosper and be able to withstand the truth.”
    78. They said to Musa, “Did you come to us to turn us away from regarding our fathers’ faith and worship in order that you two be distinguished above all others and exalted grandeur in the land? Never! We do not believe you (nor do we give credence to your message).”
    79. There and then said Pharaoh to his courtiers, “Bring me every knowledgeable sorcerer.”
    80. When all the skilled sorcerers had assembled themselves before Pharaoh, Musa said to them, “Throw forth what you cast.”
    81. And when they cast their devices, Musa said to them, “What you have just come with is simply sorcery that Allah will make void. Allah does not make the work of the corruptors of use and benefit.”
    82. By His words Allah asserts the truth, even though it is hateful to the criminals and they fight it.
    83. The people of Pharaoh knew Musa to be right. Nonetheless, only a few of them believed in the message because of fear of Pharaoh and the chiefs lest they should persecute them. Pharaoh was indeed an exalted ruler in the land of Egypt, who strayed beyond just limits, and in every manner and degree, he was extravagant.
    84. Then Musa said to the believers, “My people, if you have really believed in Allah and conformed to His will, then in Him you must trust if, indeed, you have submitted yourselves to Allah and become Muslims.”
    85. There the believers said, “In Allah we trust.” And they invoked their Lord thus: “O Allah, uphold us lest we should be lured into the temptation of the unjust people and suffer persecution.
    86. “And deliver us through Your mercy from the disbelieving people.”
    87. There, We revealed to Musa and his brother Harun to provide their people with dwellings in the land of Egypt, and We said to them, “Make of your homes a qiblah to turn to at prayer and observe your act of prayer. And announce, Musa, joyful tidings to those who believe.”
    88. Musa prayed, “O Allah, You have graced Pharaoh and his chiefs with impressive material grandeur, and You gave them riches and abundant valuable possessions, which induced them to make people stray from Your path of righteousness. O Allah, reduce their riches to obliteration and deafen their hearts to the end that they do not believe in You until they have seen the painful torment laid upon the damned.”
    89. And there, Allah said, “Musa, the prayer of you and your brother has been granted. Just keep to the way of righteousness and do not follow the way of those who are lacking knowledge of the clear truth.”
    90. We led the Children of Isra'il across the sea, whereupon Pharaoh and his hosts followed them inequitably and aggressively. Then the seawater overwhelmed them in abundance and Pharaoh realized that he was drowning. There and then he uttered his regrets and vain repentance and said, “Now do I realize that there is no god but Him Who has been believed in by the Children of Isra'il, and I am one of the Muslims.”
    91. Allah said, “Now (that you are besieged by horror and caught in the jaws of death you are willing to submit), when as yet you have withheld obedience and refused to conform to My will, and you are of the corruptors.
    92. “Today We deliver only your body so as to serve as a deterrent to your followers and successors and to be a sign of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, albeit many people are, indeed, heedless of Our signs.”
    93. We confirmed the Children of Isra'il and provided them with good locations and provided them with wholesome things. Yet they only set themselves at variance after they had received divine knowledge and illumination. But your Lord (Allah) will judge them on the Day of Judgment on the strained points upon which they used to differ.
    94. If you, Muhammad, or any of your followers are in doubt of what has been inspired to you, then you may ask those who have been reading the Book before you and interpreting it with understanding of what it meant. The truth has already come to you from your Lord. Therefore, do not let their assertion of what is false make you a doubtful and anxious wrangler.
    95. Nor should you or anyone of those who followed you be among those who cry lie to Allah’s revelations and signs lest you be one of those who are losers.
    96. Indeed, those whose thoughts thrived on disobedience have verified Allah’s divine preordination that they do not believe.”
    97. They just would not believe even if they were presented with every sign clearly betokening Allah’s omnipotence and authority until they meet face to face with the painful torment Allah lays upon the damned.
    98. Did any town believe in Allah so that the people were induced to piety and profited by it? None did, except the people of Yunus (Jonah), who, no sooner did they believe in Allah, than they were the recipients of His mercy. We cancelled their misfortunes that drew upon them worldly disgrace and shame. And We granted them comfort and enjoyment and all Allah’s blessings and enjoyment for a while.
    99. If Allah had decided, Muhammad, He would have induced all people on earth to conform to His will and to His system of faith and worship. Would you then compel mankind to be believers?
    100. No self believes in Allah but by His permission, and Allah lays the charge to those who have drawn His abomination on themselves. They are characterized by dullness of consideration.
    101. Say to the disbelievers, “Look into all that is in the heavens and on earth, all indicating an All-Powerful Maker!” But what will it avail a man, and what good do the signs and the warnings do to people who simply refuse to believe?
    102. Do they expect but the burdensome days, the like of those eventful days exhaustive to their predecessors? Say to them, “You just await the justice prepared above in Heaven. I will await it, too.”
    103. There and then We will deliver from peril Our messengers, together with those who believed. Thus it is truly incumbent on Us to save the believers.
    104. Say to them, Messenger, “O you mankind, if you are in doubt of the religion I was sent with, you had better realize that I do not conform to worshiping the idols that you worship apart from Allah, but I do worship only Allah, Who alone controls your destiny and takes your selves (in death). And I have been commanded to be among those who believe in Him.”
    105. O Messenger and believers, set your face and rest your eyes sincerely upon Allah, and your heart unswervingly on religion with sincere feelings and actions, and never be one of these who associate other deities with Allah.
    106. And do not invoke besides Allah what will not profit you or harm you, for if you do, you will then be one of those who are unjust wrongdoers.
    107. O Messenger, you must realize that should Allah let an adversity befall you, no one will be able to lift it but Him. And if He mercifully lets charity fall on you, no one can obstruct His favor with which He graces whom He wills among His servants. And He is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    108. Say to them, Muhammad, “O you people, now that the truth has come to you from your Lord (Allah), he who chooses to follow the path of guidance will only profit himself, and he who chooses to stray and loses himself in the maze of error will only harm himself. And I am not a constant trustee over you.”
    109. O Messenger, follow all that is revealed to you and exercise patience until Allah pronounces His judgment, and He is the most charitable of judges.
