SURAH 11
HUD
The Prophet Hud
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah starts by speaking about Wisdom in the Qur’an and telling the people to worship Allah alone. It then warns and gives good news. Then it declares Allah’s omnipotence and lordship, the people’s attitudes toward receiving Allah’s blessings and afflictions, the high rank of the Qur’an and the challenge it offers, the disbelievers’ unjustified disbelief in it, and the reward for believers.
    Allah narrates the stories of the prophets, their peoples’ disputation with them, the affliction of the disbelievers, and the rescue of the believers. The story of Nuh (Noah) is told in more detail here than in Surah Yunus. The present surah states the mentality and obstinacy of the disbelievers and how they are afflicted with the wrath of Allah. Following the story of Nuh, Allah mentions the story of the `Ad people with Prophet Hud and the affliction laid on the disbelievers despite their might and strength. Likewise, Allah mentions the story of His Prophet Salih with the Thamud, and the stories of Prophets Ibrahim (Abraham), Lut (Lot), and Shu`ayb. Then Allah mentions the moral lessons in these truthful stories. He concludes the surah by calling upon the believers to work and to await reward. He mentions His perfect knowledge and orders the believers to believe in Him.
  
    1. A (alif). L (lam). R (ra). The surah opens with these letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated. It is a Book whose verses are exact and precise, expressed in proper words in their proper places. It distinctly expresses all that is meant, leaving nothing merely implied, and it expounds all the laws decreed by Allah, The All-Wise and All-Knowing.
    2. O Messenger, instruct the people thus: “Never worship anyone but Allah. I am a warner by Him to give you cautionary advice in case you disbelieve and to announce to you joyful tidings if you should believe in Allah and obey Him.
    3. “And you had better invoke Allah for forgiveness and repent to Him for the way you conduct yourselves in life. He will make you enjoy good things in life up to a predetermined point of time. In the Hereafter, He will bestow on everyone of merit His divine favor that is commensurate with his merits.” And if they should turn a deaf ear, then say to them, “I only fear for you punishment on an unbearably Momentous Day when all people will be gathered.”
    4. To Allah will all of you return when He resurrects you from your graves to judge you, and He is indeed All-Determiner for all things.
    5. They bend their chests to hide, as it were, their thoughts and feelings from Allah. Do they not realize that even when they cover themselves, taking to their beds, and enshroud themselves in the veil of night, Allah knows all what their hearts store of thoughts and feelings, and all that they suggest secretly to themselves? He is Well Acquainted with all that they utter loudly and with what they whisper below their breath! Indeed Allah is All-Knowing of all private thoughts and feelings in the hearts.
    6. There is not one single creature on earth but derives its sustenance from Allah, Who knows its settled habitation and the duration of its life span. He also knows the site of its future demise. All such events are recorded in Evident Book.
    7. Allah created the heavens and the earth and brought them into existence in six days (determined by His own unit of time). His throne was then set over the water. He created the universe and you people as a part of it in order to determine which of you performs the better deed, and whether his work is imprinted with wisdom and piety. Yet when you, Muhammad, say to the disbelievers that they will rise again on the Last Day after they had been dead and buried, they will say, “This is nothing but sheer sorcery.”
    8. And if We in all wisdom delay their torment to a determined point of time (the Day of Resurrection), giving them a chance to repent, they will say, “What keeps it back?” Indeed, the Day the punishment falls to their lot, no expedient will ever avert it, and they will be beset on all sides by the same things they mocked.
    9. And if We should extend to man Our mercy and make him taste Our benediction and then We justly decide to withhold it, he nurses despair, and in disbelief he shows his worst side.
    10. And if We grace him with a favor following a touch of misfortune, he says, “Now I have been freed of misfortunes,” and he rejoices exceedingly. And he boasts the event and exalts himself unduly and neglects to thank Allah.
    11. Such an attitude is never adopted by those who exercise patience and do righteous deeds in times of joy and of affliction. Such persons are the recipients of Allah’s forgiveness and deserve a great reward.
    12. O Prophet, you seem inclined to leave the recital of a part of what is revealed to you, the part that straitens your breast, because it is not to the disbelievers’ liking, when they say, “If only a treasure were sent down to him from Heaven or an angel to accompany him, we may be induced to recognize his mission.” You must realize that you are only a warner, and Allah is the Trustee of everything.
    13. If they say “He has forged it,” say to them, “So produce ten forged surahs, each referring to a different aspect of the same thought, and call on any people and jinn besides Allah whom you can possibly engage to venture upon this undertaking, if indeed you are declaring the truth.”
    14. And if they do not respond and fail to fulfill such an undertaking, then you people must know that the Qur’an has indeed sent down from Allah and has been revealed by His authority, and there is no god but Him. Therefore, are you disbelievers going to conform to Islam (if indeed you are seeking the truth)?
    15. Those who are concerned only with the pleasures of this life and its mundane things may rest assured that We will apportion to them in full what is due to them, and they will not be unjustly depreciated.
    16. But such persons are those who will be denied Allah’s mercy in the Hereafter, and Hell is where they will make abode. Their hopes will be doomed to frustration and their deeds to worthlessness; and vain, indeed, and useless will be all their worldly deeds.
    17. Do they compare the person whose innermost thoughts and being are floodlit with divine enlightenment and who is witnessed by the Qur’an, which features Providence as the guide, and before the Qur’an by the Book of Musa (Moses), which features Allah’s guidance and mercy—do they compare him with one who is lost in the maze of error? The former and his like acknowledge the divine nature of the Qur’an; whereas the latter, together with those who confederate against the truth and deny the Qur’an, is promised Hell, which is the abode of the damned on the Day of Resurrection. Therefore, Prophet, do not let the disbelievers’ evil disposition influence your conduct and the conduct of those who believe. The Qur’an is the divine truth manifest from your Lord, but most people do not believe.
    18. And who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against Allah? These and their like will be assembled before Allah on the Day of Judgment, and there and then they will be reprimanded by the witnesses (the angels, the messengers, and the pious people): “These are they who ascribed to Allah all the lies they could devise; therefore, the curse of Allah will be on those who were unjust.
    19. “[Those who] stood in the way to prevent Allah’s spirit of truth from guiding people, making it their aim to pervert the truth and crook the path of righteousness to their own ends; and they disbelieve in the truth of the Hereafter.”
    20. These disbelievers are not ever in a position to escape His punishment. Nor do they have besides Him protectors to defend them. Their punishment will be doubled in the train of their obstinacy against divine laws, and their struggle to obstruct Allah’s path of righteousness, and their persistence in closing their hearts and ears to Allah’s word.
    21. These are they who have not gained a thing by worshiping other than Allah, and who have been forsaken and renounced by those who they presumed shared Allah’s divine attributes with Him and who failed their expectation.
    22. It is no wonder that they will be great losers in the Hereafter.
    23. Indeed, those who believe in Allah and His messengers and did righteous deeds, and whose innermost thoughts and being have complied with the will of Allah, are they whom Allah will make the inmates of Paradise, wherein they will live in eternity.
    24. The example of the two parties (those believers in Allah and those against Him) is like the two partisans: the adherent to falsehood who is blind and deaf, and the adherent to the truth who lifts to Allah his inward sight and opens his heart’s ears to admonition. Are they equal or do they deserve the same fate? Can you people not consider this matter?
    25. We sent Nuh (Noah) to his people with a divine message. He said to them, “My people, I give you a warning  notice with regard to your system of faith (and worship, and show you the path of safety).
    26. “You must not worship any but Allah. If you turn a deaf ear, then I fear for you an immense torment on a Momentous Day.”
    27. But those disbelieving dignitaries among his people said to him, “It is evident that you are no more than a mortal like the rest of us, and we do not see that you have not been followed by any but the abject among us. Nor do we see that you people are merited with such a distinguishing attribute; to the contrary, we think you are liars.”
    28. Nuh said, “My people, pause here and think: What if Allah has sent me supported by clear evidence from Him and has extended to me His mercy and message, to which you are blind? Shall we impose on you such spiritual enlightenment when you hate it?
    29. “My people, I do not charge you wealth for what I convey to you of Allah’s divine message. The reward for divine service rests only in the hands of Allah. Nor can I dismiss those who believe in Allah (on account of your despicable opinion of them). They will meet with Allah on the Day of Judgment. But then I can see that you people are indeed ignorant.
    30. “Can you people tell me who will make me avert Allah’s punishment if I dare to dismiss them? Can you not reflect and remember that?
    31. “I do not claim to possess the treasuries of Allah, nor do I indulge in prophecy or claim to foretell future events, nor am I aware of the unseen, nor do I say to you I am an angel, nor do I say to you that those whom you view with contempt will be denied Allah’s blessings. Allah alone knows best their innermost thoughts and feelings. If I do this, then I am indeed among the unjust to themselves and to others.”
    32. But they said to him, “O Nuh, you have argued to persuade us to believe in you. In fact, you have argued much until we felt bored. Bring down the promised torment if you are, indeed, declaring the truth.”
    33. Nuh said to them, “But it is Allah Who causes His torment to alight upon you if He wills, and you will never be able to escape His torment.
    34. “Nor will my admonition profit you simply because I wish you good if Allah should decide to lead you in the wrong in the train of your ill-natured hearts. He is your Lord, and back to Him all of you will inevitably return on the Day of Resurrection when you will be judged for what you have been doing.”
    35. Or do they (the Quraysh) say about you, Muhammad, “He has forged a long tale!” Say to them, “If I have forged what I am conveying to you to make it seem divine, then I am responsible for my falsehood, which is a grave crime, and I am innocent of all your wrong actions that render you criminal in Allah’s sight.”
    36. It was revealed to Nuh: “No more of your people besides those who have already believed in the truth of your mission will conform to Allah’s will; therefore, do not be grieved at heart for what they have been doing to you by holding you a liar and harming you (because We will punish them soon).
    37. “Build the ark under Our supervision and Our revelation so that We might save you by Our Providence, and do not plead with Me for those who are wrongdoers; I made it their destiny for them to be destroyed by drowning.” 
    38. As Nuh was building the ark, he was mocked at, as often as leading disbelievers went by. But he said to them, “If you mock at us, we will mock at you, as you mock now.
    39. “In the end you will know who is destined to receive the torment that will humiliate him and make him suffer the everlasting punishment.”
    40. When Our command came to pass and the water bubbled up and rose in billows and erupted through the earth’s surface inundating the land, We said to him, “Carry with you on board ship a pair, a male and a female, of every kind of living creature together with your family, except those against whom Allah has already given His word, and carry those who believe among your people, who are but some few.”
    41. Nuh said to those of his people whom he was about to carry, “Go on board ship and rest assured of Allah’s mercy. In the name of Allah will be its free and secure floatation and when it drops anchor. Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.”
    42. The ark sailed through waves rising in billows and running mountain high. There and then Nuh called to his son, who was in isolation, and said to him, “My son, come with us on board ship and do not stay behind with the disbelievers who disobeyed Allah.”
    43. The son replied (to his remorseful father), “I will have recourse to a mountain for shelter. It will protect me from the overflowing water.” “My son,” said Nh, “today neither a mountain nor anything else will avail you against Allah’s command except His mercy.” There, the abundant flow of water, rising in billows, intervened between them, and the son was among those destined to drown.
    44. There and then a divine command was pronounced to the earth: “Engulf, O earth, your water and cease, O heaven, your rainfall.” And the water subsided and the ark rested securely upon Mount Judi, and then it was said, “Away with those unjust wrongdoers!”
    45. There and then Nuh prayed to His Lord, “O Allah my Creator, my son is an integral part of me and my family and You promised to save my family. Your promise is the truth, and You are the fairest of judges because You are All-Knowing and All-Wise.”
    46. “He is not a part of your family,” said Allah. “By his disbelief, the relation between you and him is severed, and your son was not pious. Your plea on behalf of your son is not an act of wisdom and piety; therefore, do not invoke Me for something whose consequence you do not know. I exhort you not to be one of those in want of intellect.”
    47. Nuh said, “O Allah, my Creator and Lord, I seek refuge in your counter the consequence accruing from an invocation with a result I do not know; and unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will inevitably be one of the losers.”
    48. He was told, “Disembark, Nuh, and go downhill safe and secure with peace and security proceeding from Us and with blessings upon you and your followers and upon their descendants who conform to Our will and upon succeeding generations. Some We will give enjoyment and We will put to the torment laid upon the damned.”
    49. This narrative that We revealed to you, Prophet, is one of facts and events belonging to the unseen and the unknown. Neither you nor your people knew it before in detail. Therefore, be patient and realize that the good and happy outcome will fall to those who entertain the profound fear of Allah’s torment and who do pious deeds.
    50. Again, We sent to the people of `Ad their brother, the Messenger Hud, who said to them, “O my people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him. You are indeed a people who forge lies against Allah (by claiming that He has partners who deserve to be worshiped so that they may be intercessors for you before Allah).”
    51. He added, “My people, I do not charge you a reward for the divine message I convey to you; the reward for divine service is from Him Who created me. Can you not reflect?
    52. “My people, invoke Allah your Creator’s forgiveness, and humbly repent to Him. He will pour down upon you rain and blessings, making you a people of prosperity. He will add to your strength to make you stronger in influence and authority that you may have great controlling power over things. Do not fall deaf nor lose yourselves in a maze, precipitating your crime that will cause your destruction.”
    53. Nonetheless, they said to him, “O Hud, you never presented to us clear evidence evincing the truth of your call, and we will not forsake our gods at your word, and we do not give credence to your message.
    54. “We can only say that some of our gods must have gripped you with a touch of demonic illusions.” But Hud said to them, “Allah is my witness, and so are you, that I am absolutely innocent of those whom you associate with Him.
    55. “I am quit, also, of all those whom you invoke besides Allah. Therefore, I defy you all, you and your gods, to scheme against me and to do all you can and give me no respite.
    56. “In Allah, my Lord and yours, do I trust; there is not a being but He grasps it by the forelock; He is the controlling power over everything. Indeed, Allah stands straight for the Path of justice and righteousness.”
    57. “Should they turn a deaf ear,” said Allah, “then say to them, ‘I have conveyed to you, my people, the divine message entrusted to me, and you must realize that Allah is indeed capable of replacing you by others, and never can you harm or frustrate Him. Allah is indeed All-Vigilant preserving everything.’”
    58. When Our command came to pass, We rescued Hud, together with those who believed with him (from the violent storm)—an act of mercy vouchsafed by Us to save them from a harsh torment.
    59. These were the people of `Ad who just would not bow their hearts’ ears to the divine revelations to all His messengers, by disobeying Hud and by adhering to the same evil line of conduct of every stubborn one who plays the stubborn tyrant.
    60. Consequently, they were followed by a curse from Allah all their life, and in the Hereafter. Indeed, the people of `Ad disobeyed Allah and their hearts dared rise defiant against Him; therefore, away from existence were they put.
    61. We sent also to the people of Thamud their brother, the Messenger Salih, who said to them, “O my people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him. He brought you forth from the earth and made it the world you settle in. Therefore, invoke His forgiveness and humbly repent to Him. Allah is, indeed, in the immediate proximity of everything, and He responds to invocation.”
    62. But they said to him, “Salih, you have been thus far the hope that sprang in our breasts. Do you forbid us the faith and worship adopted by our fathers? Indeed, we doubt the validity of what you urge us to do and we think it raises suspicion.”
    63. There Salih said, “My people, pause here and think: what if Allah has enlightened my innermost being and imparted to me knowledge, and wisdom, and extended His mercy to me? Then, how can I neglect the duty of conveying His message to the people? This will be disobedience. If I disobey Allah, who then can vindicate me from His punishment? You people are simply trying to lead me into error and make me lose my way to Allah’s mercy.”
    64. He added, “My people, this is the she-camel of Allah, a distinct sign of the truth of my mission. Let her graze upon the grassland of Allah and do not lay hands on her or meddle with her to harm her lest you would be overtaken by a dire torment before long.”
    65. But still they hamstrung, and there Salih said to them, “You have only three days to enjoy after the way you conduct yourselves in life. This, is indeed, an irrevocable promise not belied.”
    66. When Our Command came to pass, We delivered Salih and those who acknowledged Allah’s message, an act of mercy vouchsafed by Us to save them from the shame and the disgrace incurred on that momentous day. Allah, your Lord is indeed All-Strong and All-Mighty.
    67. Direful was the one awful cry from heaven; it stirred up a merciless blast that overtook the wrongdoers. There, they were destroyed, cowering on their faces under the ruins of their demolished houses.
    68. Devastating was the blast and irretrievable was the disaster so that the Thamud looked as if they had never dwelt nor flourished where they perished. Indeed, the Thamud had disbelieved in Allah, and their hearts dared rise defiant against Him; therefore the Thamud were put away from existence.
    69. Once Our messengers—disguised angels—visited Ibrahim (Abraham) and told him the good news that he would have a son. They greeted him with the expression of good will, “Peace,” which he returned to assure them they were welcome. Then he placed before them a roasted fatted calf.
    70. But when he noticed that they did not stretch out their hands to eat, he recoiled apprehensive and fearful. They calmed him and said to him, “Do not be afraid. We have been sent to those people of Lut (Lot).”
    71. His wife, standing near, overheard what was said and laughed (for the safety of Lut, her husband’s nephew). And there We announced to her the good news of a son, Ishaq (Isaac), to be followed by a grandson, Ya`qub (Jacob).
    72. There and then she exclaimed, “Woe to me! Will I give birth to a child at my old age and my husband is an old man! This, indeed, is wonderful!”
    73. “Do you wonder,” said the angels, “at the divine command from Allah? Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you and may all grace be made to abound in you people of the house of prophethood (It is no wonder that He endows you with what He does not endow to others). Allah is, indeed, worthy of all praise. He is Ever-Glorious, Ever-Generous, and Ever-Giving.”
    74. Then when Ibrahim’s dread was gone and his mind was calm and joyful with the good news, he began to argue with Our messengers for the people of Lut, pleading with Us on their behalf.
    75. Forbearance was indeed an attribute of Ibrahim, who constantly implored Allah with plaintive entreaties and lifted to Him his penitence so that He might revoke the punishment of the people of Lut with the hope that they would return to Allah.
    76. But the angels told him, “Do not envelop yourself, Ibrahim, within the folds of this matter, for the Command of your Lord has come; they are destined to suffer a condign torment that no expedient can avert.”
    77. When Our angels—disguised as youths—went to Lut, he was vexed and straitened on account of his expectation that his perverse people would act sinfully in such a circumstance, and he did not know what to do. He said, “This is, indeed, a distressful day.”
    78. His people went to him rushing and intending to precipitate the immoral act that they had long been practicing before. Lut said to them, “These are my daughters, if you wish to join them in wedlock. This will be virtuous and you will be acting with moral righteousness. Be pious to Allah and shame me not before my guests; is there no one among you characterized by right guidance and prudence?”
    79. They said to him, “You know very well that we do not have the right to claim your daughters nor do we need them. You know quite well what we want.”
    80. Lut said, “If only I could overpower you or have a powerful support to lean on!”
    81. There and then the angels declared their identity and said to Lut, “We are Allah’s messengers. Do not grieve at heart. They cannot get to harm you. Just leave town together with your family at the late hours of the night, and make sure that none of you turns to look back in the direction from which you came so that he may not see the condign punishment and lest he should be harmed by it. But not your wife, who is destined to be afflicted by the same fate decreed for the others. The morning is appointed time. Is the morning not near?”
    82. When Our Command came to pass, We turned those towns— Sodom and Gomorrah—upside down and showered them with tiered brimstones of baked clay.
    83. A punishment marked from your Lord, and it is not far from the unjust wrongdoers among your people.
    84. We sent to the Madyan people their brother, the Messenger Shu`ayb, who said to them, “My people, worship Allah alone; you have no god but Him. You must not fraudulently scant the measure and the weight. I see that you are people of charitable goodness, and I do fear for you the torment coming on a momentous day when all the guilty will be encompassed and there is no escape.
    85. “My people, I advise you to dispense the measure and the weight equitably to the full and not to scant people’s goods and chattels, nor devalue what is valuable, be it goods or possessions, nor perpetrate or make corruption on earth.
    86. “The legitimate profits you people gain lawfully and blessed by Allah are but an advantage to your cause if indeed you are believers and avoid that which He has prohibited to you. But you must remember, I am not here to guard over your deeds.” 
    87. They said to him mockingly, “O Shu`ayb, do your prayers enjoin you to urge us to renounce Our fathers’ worship, or do you tell us that we must not use our money as we will? But we have always thought you were forbearing, right-guided!
    88. There Shu`ayb said to them, “My people, tell me: What if Allah has enlightened my innermost being and imparted to me knowledge, wisdom, and made His grace and provision abound in me? I want you to realize that I do not move you to this divine course of action and forbid you to adopt your dishonest system of trading and its ill-gotten gains. My aim is only reform; I wish to do the best I can until the pious principle governs your thoughts and you abandon wrongdoing. My successful attainment of the desired end rests with Allah; in Him I trust and to Him I refer and return penitent.
    89. “My people, do not let our diversity of opinion and purpose incite you to sink deeper lest you should be destined to suffer the same affliction suffered by the people of Nuh (Noah) or the people of Hud or the people of Salih; nor are the people of Lut far off from you in time or distance.
    90. “And invoke Allah for forgiveness and repent to Him of the way you conduct yourselves in life. Allah is indeed Ever-Merciful, Most-Affectionate, Who comforts whom He sees in distress.”
    91. They said to him, “O Shu`ayb, we can hardly comprehend much of your speech. In fact, we see that among us you are but a weak man and not at all capable of defending yourself or persuading us. Were it not for your family, we would have pelted you with stones, and you are not that mighty to prevail against us.”
    92. “My people,” said Shu`ayb, “is my clan more esteemed in your sight than Allah, Whom you have cast behind your backs? Indeed, Allah is All-Knowing Encompassing all that you do.”
    93. Shu`ayb continued, “My people, you may pursue what you are capable of doing, but I am steering my course of action (which is the reverse of yours). And you will soon come to know who will be befallen with a disgracing torment and who is a liar that intentionally asserts falsehood. You just be on the watch for the justice prepared above in Heaven, and I will also be on the watch.”
    94. When Our command came to pass, We delivered Shu`ayb together with those who believed with him, an act of mercy vouchsafed by Us to whom We bless. And how direful was the shout from heaven, stirring up a merciless blast that overtook the wrongdoers. They were destroyed and were cowering on their faces under the ruins of their demolished houses.
    95. Devastating was the blast and irretrievable was the disaster so that the Madyan looked as if they had never dwelt or flourished where they perished. Therefore the Madyan were put away from existence, just as the Thamud were put away.
    96. We sent Musa (Moses) well equipped with signs to demonstrate his truthfulness and delegated evident authority.
    97. We sent Musa to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but Pharaoh disbelieved in him and ordered his people to follow him in disbelief. And they followed Pharaoh, whose command was not following right-guidance.
    98. And as Pharaoh led his people in life below to the maze of error, he will lead them to Hell-fire in the Hereafter; miserable indeed is the place they are herded to (where they will drink boiling water to quench their thirst, but it will tear their stomachs apart instead).
    99. Consequently, they were followed by a curse from Allah all their life, a curse that will be worse in the Hereafter. And miserable indeed are the maledictions poured upon those who in life have drawn Allah’s wrath upon themselves; such a combination is emblematic of a malignant fate.
    100. Such a historic account of the towns that We destroyed is a narrative of facts and events We relate to you, O Prophet. Some of them are still standing as evidence, and others have been mowed down.
    101. Allah never did injustice to them by destroying them, but it was they who imprudently did injustice to themselves by disbelief and idolatry. Nor did their gods that they invoked besides Allah avail them anything, nor did they help them when the command of Allah came to pass. To the contrary, they added to their detriment.
    102. Thus much is the punishment of Allah when He overtakes the towns whose inhabitants are wrongdoers, as He did to the people of Nuh, `Ad, Thamud, and others. Allah’s act of overthrowing the wicked is, indeed, painful, and terrifying to the unjust.
    103. Indeed, the narrative of these events represents a sermon to those who are certain of resurrection and fear convincing evidence of Allah’s inevitable punishment on the Day of Judgment, the Day when all will assemble themselves before Allah for reckoning and will be witnessed by angels and people.
    104. The Day We delay but to a predetermined point of time. (No matter how long it is in the sight of people, it is short to Allah.)
    105. And when this Day comes, trembling will be so great that no one will speak except at Allah’s permission. Some (the disbelievers) will be wretched, and some (the believes) will be exceedingly happy.
    106. As for those sorely wretched, the end of their journey is Hell, where they make abode, wherein they are groaning and sighing.
    107. They will remain within as long as the heavens and the earth last, except as Allah wills. Allah does what He wills.
    108. But those whom Allah has graced will instantly make abode in Paradise, wherein they will have eternity, except as your Lord wills. Allah’s bestowal is continuous and unceasing.
    109. Therefore, do not wrangle, Prophet, about the evil outcome of the system of faith and worship the idolaters follow. They follow the same system their fathers adopted before. We will apportion to them their share of punishment (commensurate with their evil deeds), a punishment that will not be diminished.
    110. The same course of action was adopted when We gave Musa the Tawrah, and his people differed about it. And had it not been for Allah’s word proclaimed beforehand to put punishment in respite, their differences would have decided. Those people were as doubtful and suspicious of the Tawrah (as your people, Muhammad, are of the Qur’an).
    111. Nonetheless, Allah will requite both parties with what is commensurate with their deeds. He is All-Knowing, indeed, of all their deeds, good and bad.
    112. Therefore, Muhammad, just follow—together with those who believe—the path of life and action in the manner ordained by Allah, so as to be people of singular piety, righteousness, and virtue. But do not carry things to excess nor transgress. He is Ever-Seeing of all your deeds.
    113. Nor should your hearts be inclined in the least to follow the unjust lest you deserve punishment by the Fire. And besides Allah you have no patrons or anyone to help you against your enemies.
    114. Observe your act of prayer at both ends of the day and at the different hours of the night for pious and virtuous deeds cancel evil deeds. This is simply a reminder for those who keep remembering Allah.
    115. Be patient, Prophet, and remember that Allah does not waste the rewards that people are entitled to reap from deeds of wisdom and piety.
    116. If only there had been among the preceding unjust generations that We destroyed, a class of persons influential enough to warn people against corruption and to forbid mischief on earth and prohibit perversion as did the few of them whom We saved. But the unjust pursued pleasure and lusted after the mundane luxury they were entangled with and were steeped in crime.
    117. Nor would Allah unjustly cause the towns to perish when truth governs the thoughts of their inhabitants and they are righteous.
    118. And if Allah had willed, He would have made mankind one single nation conforming to one religion. Nonetheless, their differences would have induced them to be at variance about everything, even belief in Allah, His angels, His messengers, and the Last Day.
    119. But not those whom Allah has graced with His mercy. In this manner of freedom of choice and of thinking He created mankind. Thus has the word of Allah answered the purpose and complied with His decree: “I will fill Hell with jinn together with people (who were wrongdoers).”
    120. We relate to you, Prophet, these various narratives of the messengers who were sent before you, representing their determined effort under difficulties to accomplish the necessary end. We narrate them to you to confirm your heart-sight and strengthen it in purpose and action. In the recital of these facts, you will find, Prophet, narratives imbued with divine grace, imparting the truth, exhorting and reminding those who believe and those who are inclined to believe.
    121. Say, Prophet, to those disbelievers, “You may exert your utmost effort to fight Islam and harm the believers, but we are steering our course of action and are steadfast in it.
    122. “And await that which you anticipate for us; we will also await Allah’s pledge of success of the call and its triumph over its enemies.”
    123. To Allah alone belongs the knowledge of all that is unseen in the heavens and the earth, and to Him are submitted all matters and all affairs (for consideration, decision, and execution). Therefore, worship Him alone and put your trust in Him and fear no one but Him. He is never heedless of all that you believers and disbelievers do, and He will reward everyone with what he deserves in this world and in the Hereafter.
 
