SURAH 12
YUSUF
Joseph
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah narrates the story of Prophet Yusuf (Joseph). Allah refers to it as the fairest of stories and says that the Prophet Muhammad did not know it before it was revealed to him. At the end of the story, Allah calls to the Prophet’s attention that this is one of the stories of the unseen. The Prophet was not with Yusuf’s brothers when they plotted evil for their brother. Allah says that obstinacy and envy compel most people to be disbelievers. The Prophet does not seek to gain from conveying the message; rather, he conveys the Qur’an to the people as a guidance and remembrance for all of mankind.
    At the end of the surah, Allah points out the messengers whose stories He has revealed, as well as the attitudes of their nations toward them and their final vindication over the criminal disbelievers. Allah assures that in the stories of these prophets there are morals for people who comprehend and that the Qur’an is not a forgery or falsely attributed to Allah. It is, rather, the truth and the Book that bears witness to the preceding heavenly Books, and the guidance and mercy to people who ponder, apprehend, and believe.
    The striking characteristic of this surah is that it narrates the story of Yusuf and shows the prevalence of envy in the family when amity was shown to some of them. The envy of Ya`qub’s (Jacob’s) sons for their brother enticed them to throw him into a well, but Allah preserved him from their cunning. Allah also kept Yusuf away from the seduction of the court official’s wife when he became a youth there. Allah gave him mastery over the land and made him the resort of those who had conspired against him. Thus is His way with His prophets and those who follow Him loyally. He vindicates them over their enemies and gives them command over the land as long as they stick to what is right and believe in Him and hold fast to His path.

    1. A (alif). L (lam). R (ra). The surah opens with these letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated. These are divinely revealed verses flowing with the evident precision and grace that are symbolic of the Book (the Qur’an).
    2. It is a Book We have sent down in Arabic so that you Arabs may, it is hoped, comprehend it and learn it by heart and convey it to people.
    3. We narrate to you, Prophet, a most engaging of narratives. We reveal it to you, this Qur'an, notwithstanding, that before it you were unmindful of divine knowledge, true events, and illumination and enlightenment.
    4. Once Yusuf (Joseph) said to his father Ya`qub (Jacob), “O my father, I saw in my sleep eleven planets, the sun, and the moon prostrating to me.”
    5. His father said to him, “My son, do not relate your vision to your brothers lest they, driven by envy, plot against you and lure you into danger. They may fall into the hands of Satan, who is indeed an avowed enemy to man.”
    6. He continued, “Thus Allah will select you and teach to you the knowledge of interpreting visions (and what they prefigure of future events). He perfécts His favor and munificence to you and to the progeny of Ya`qub as much as He perfécted all grace in your grandfathers Ibrahim (Abraham) and Ishaq (Isaac) before. Allah is indeed All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    7. Indeed, there is in the story of Yusuf and his brothers an instructive example, a warning, and signs for those who are seeking knowledge.
    8. Conspiring against him, the brothers said, “Yusuf and his (full) brother, Benjamin, are indeed closer to our father’s love than we are. Our father stands, indeed, manifest of error.”
    9. They said, “Kill Yusuf or take him away to some distant land, for then your father would favor you (and then you stand repentant to Allah of your evil deed and apologetic to your father, who will accept your apology).”
    10. But one of them said, “Do not kill Yusuf, for such an act will be a grave crime. Throw him down the well where he will be out of sight, and there, he will be picked up by some travelers or others, if you have indeed decided to get rid of him.”
    11. And so they asked their father, “Our father, why don’t you trust us for the care of Yusuf? We assure you that we are kind advisers to him, and wish him goodness and guide him to it.
    12. “Send him with us tomorrow to frolic and to take part in games, and we will take care of him (and see that he is not exposed to danger).”
    13. “It grieves me at heart to part with him,” said the father, “and I am afraid lest the boy be devoured by a wolf at a moment when you are heedless of him.”
    14. “If this be true,” they said, “and the wolf were to devour him when we are a collective mass of men, then we would be losers.” 
    15. And they took him and went away. They were united in thought and placed him at the bottom of the well. There and then We revealed to Yusuf thus: “You will one day inform them of the evil they committed against you at a time when they are unaware of you.”
    16. And they came back home to their father at eventide weeping (their fill).
    17. They said to him, “Our father, we went racing with each other, leaving Yusuf to take care of our things, and there, standing alone, he was eaten by the wolf. But you do not believe us, although we are telling the truth.”
    18. They brought back his garment stained with false blood. Their father said, “Indeed your selves have enticed you to do something grave. In becoming patience I seek help in Allah to bear with composure what you have just described.”
    19. There came a caravan of merchants traveling to Egypt. They sent on their water purveyor (the harbinger), who found a well. He let down his bucket to draw water. But as he hauled up the bucket, he did not find water but a boy clinging to the rope and the bucket instead. He announced with joy the good news of hauling up a boy, and they secretly kept him in their merchandise. And Allah was All-Knower of what they were doing. 
    20. They sold him (to a slave dealer) for a paltry price amounting to a small number of silver coins, and they esteemed him lightly had had no interest in him lest his family should catch them, recognize him, and take him away from them.
    21. The man who bought him said to his wife, “Treat him kindly and with honor and respect to make him enjoy his stay. He may prove useful to us or we may adopt him as a son.” Thus We established him firmly in the land, so that We could impart to him the knowledge of interpreting visions and dreams and what they prefigure of future events. Allah prevails upon His edict, which inevitably produces its intended effect, but most people do not know.
    22. Then when Yusuf reached the stage of life wherein he had the ability for effective action, We imparted to him wisdom and knowledge. For thus We reward those who turn their thoughts on moral excellence and fair benevolence.
    23. The lady of the house where he lived tried to solicited him. She closed the doors and said to him, “Come to me.” But he said, “Allah be my refuge! He is my Lord; He has been kind to me; He delivered me from harm and gave me a good home, and my master gave me a hearty welcome and a hospitable lodging in his house. Heaven will never prosper the unjust wrongdoers.”
    24. She had a passionate desire for him, a desire she meant to bring to effect physically; and he had a physical desire for her. It might have been physical, had he not felt the evidence from Allah in his heart and the internal recognition of the moral quality of one’s motives and actions approving the right and condemning the wrong. We stirred his heart to live in the conscientious practice of all that is good so that We guarded him from obscenity and immorality; He was indeed one of Our sincere worshipers.
    25. She and Yusuf raced to the door. She could only reach the back of his garment, and in his struggle to advance forward, the back of his garment was ripped. Her master was just coming in and they all met at the door. To justify her action and take her revenge, she said to her husband, “What punishment should be appropriate for someone who tried to assail your wife but that he be imprisoned or suffer a condign torment?”
    26. Yusuf said, “She tried to solicit me to an immoral act.” When the family gathered to judge the case, one of her family wisely said, “If his garment is ripped at the front, then she is in the right and the truth is on her side, and he is lying.
    27. “And,” he added, “if his garment is ripped from the rear, then she is lying and he has the truth on his side.”
    28. When her husband saw the garment ripped from the rear, he said, “This is one of the plotting of you women; potent indeed is your plotting.”
    29. “Yusuf,” he continued, “let go this incident, and you, my wife, invoke Allah’s forgiveness; you were indeed in the wrong.”
    30. The rumor circulated among some women in the city. They said, “The wife of the court officer solicits her young man (slave); she is much enamoured of him and inflamed with love. We see that she is indeed vitiated by error.”
    31. When she heard of their evil scheming, she invited them to her house. The seats were propped up with cushions, the table was set with food, and table knives were put in place. She ordered Yusuf to come into the room. When the women saw him, they were so overwhelmed with wonder and marveled so at his exceptional good looks that they missed the fruit and wounded their hands. They exclaimed, “Allah forbid! This is not a mortal; he is none other than a highly impressive, honorable, and distinguished angel.”
    32. There and then she said to them, “This is he on whose account you blamed me. I solicited him, but he refused, and I swear that unless he submits to my command, he will be put in prison and be belittled.”
    33. “O Allah,” said Yusuf, “I would rather be imprisoned than submit to their evil desire, and unless You keep their intrigues away from me, I may succumb to them and be one of the ignorant.”
    34. Allah responded to his invocation and kept their plotting away from him. He is indeed All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    35. But the men thought it would be in the best interests of all concerned that he be put in prison for a while, although they saw all the signs confirming his innocence. 
    36. Along with Yusuf, two young men serving in the court were put in prison. Each of them had a dream. One of them saw himself pressing grapes to make wine, and the other saw himself carrying bread on his head and the birds were eating from it. They asked Yusuf, “Can you reveal to us the significance of these dreams? We see you to be a fair-doer and with the ability to interpret dreams.”
    37. “Rest assured,” he said, “before food is provided you, I will have informed you of the interpretation of your dreams. This is a part of the divine knowledge that Allah has imparted to me. I have forsaken the creed of a people who do not believe in Allah and refuse to acknowledge the truth of the Hereafter.
    38. “I have followed the creed of my fathers Ibrahim, Ishaq, and Ya`qub. It was never befitting that we associate with Allah other deities, be they angels, jinn, or humans, let alone idols that do not hear or see. This is His grace abounding in us and in mankind, but most people do not receive this grace with thankful gratitude.
    39. “Fellow prisoners, do you believe that such an immense universe could be controlled with such precision by a group of deities diverse in kind or by Allah the One and Only, Who is All-Powerful, Absolute, and Vanquisher?”
    40. “In fact,” he added, “those whom you worship besides Him are but names of objects you and your fathers have designated as gods—a system of faith and worship Allah has never authorized. Indeed, decision, command, and judgment are asserted as Allah’s own; He ordained that you worship no one but Him. This is the right religion and worship, but most people do not know this fact.
    41. “Fellow prisoners, now you will have the interpretation of your dreams. As for the fellow pressing grapes, he will be released and restored to his position and will serve his lord with wine; whereas the other will be crucified and the birds will eat of his head. There, the case is decreed concerning your inquiry.”
    42. Then said he to the inmate who he thought would be released, “Mention my name (and my story) to your lord when you are in his presence.” But in the midst of the court, the servant yielded to the lower part of his nature, which is guided by Satan, and forgot to mention to his lord the story of his fellow prisoner. Consequently, Yusuf remained in prison for several years.
    43. And once the king said to his retinue, “I saw in my dream seven plump cows eaten by seven lean and emaciated ones, and seven green ears of corn and seven dry ones. Give me, chiefs, your opinion on that vision I had in my sleep if you are well versed in interpreting visions.”
    44. “These are nothing but jumbled dreams,” they said, “nor are we conversant with the interpretation of dreams.”
    45. There and then Yusuf’s fellow prisoner who had heard of the king’s dream at last remembered Yusuf and his story. He said, “Permit me to go to where I can get you the true interpretation.”
    46. The man went to Yusuf and said, “Yusuf, O man of righteousness and truth, reveal to us this dream and what it prefigures: Seven plump cows were eaten by seven lean and emaciated ones, and seven green ears of corn together with seven dry ones. Give me your opinion so that I may go back to the people and inform them of what they should know.”
    47. Yusuf not only told him what people should expect, but he also suggested the safety measures to be taken. He said, “You will sow the land in diligent laboring, and when it is the season for reaping the ripened grain, leave it in its ears and lay it up in store except a little that you will eat.
    48. “Following this period, there will come seven droughty years   consuming all that you have saved except the little that you have to use for seed.
    49. “Then, there will follow a year in which people will rejoice at the abundance of rain and at the yield of grapevines and olives and other juicy and oily trees, and they will be busy pressing juices and extracting oils.”
    50. The king said, “Bring him to me.” When the king’s messenger went to get him, Yusuf (with just confidence, said to the messenger), “Go back to your master and ask him to reopen my case and question the women who severely cut their hands at the banquet about what they had in mind to trap. Allah is, indeed, fully aware of their scheming.”
    51. There and then the king summoned the women and questioned them. He asked, “What was your purpose and intention when you solicited Yusuf? Was he inclined to you?” They said, “Allah forbid! We have never known him to be morally depraved.” The court official’s wife said, “Now that the truth has come out, it was I who solicited him and he has, indeed, been telling the truth.
    52. “I declare the truth so that Yusuf knows that I did not advantage myself of his absence and betray him or attribute falsehood to him. Allah does not cause the treacherous to attain their end.
    53. “I am not trying to acquit myself of the guilt that resided in my intention. One’s self urges one to propound evil except those who are graced with Allah’s mercy, and Providence is their guide. Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Most-Merciful.”
    54. There and then the king commanded that Yusuf be brought to him. He said, “I will use him as my counselor and he will be exclusively my own.” Then the king said to him, “You are now held precious in esteem, and you are granted security and authority.”
    55. There Yusuf said, “Now, O king, (that you have faith in me,) then entrust me with the granaries and the storehouses of the agricultural and natural products of the land and with the treasuries of the realm. You will find me trustworthy and capable of guarding the interests of the kingdom and knowing how to manage affairs cleverly.”
    56. Thus We firmly established Yusuf in the land where he could extend his power and jurisdiction wherever he willed. We bestow Our  mercy on whom We will, and never do We waste the reward of the fair-doers.
    57. Moreover, the reward in the Hereafter will be far better; it falls to those who recognize Allah with believing and pious hearts. 
    58. (Years passed and famine ensued and extended to neighboring countries. The brothers, driven like others by the famine, journeyed to Egypt to buy grain.) They went to the man in charge of the granaries (Yusuf), who knew them while they failed to recognize him.
    59. He supplied them with their requirement of grain. He said to them, “So, you have a brother through your father. Bring him to me. Do you not see that I dispense the measure to the full and that I afford welcome and extend the most generous hospitality to guests and visitors?”
    60. “If you do not bring him,” he added, “I will deny you the provision of grain that you need, and you will not be allowed to come near me.”
    61. They said to him, “We will talk his father into our cause and solicit him into sending our brother with us, and rest assured that we will certainly do this.”
    62. There and then Yusuf said to his attendants, “Put back their money that they paid for the grain into their saddlebags. They may see it when they go back to their people, and, it is hoped, they will be encouraged to come back.”
    63. When they returned to their father, they said to him, “O father, we have been denied future measures of grain unless we are accompanied by our brother Benjamin; therefore, (we beg you to) send him with us so that we can get our supply of grain, and we promise to guard him home.”
    64. The father said, “Shall I entrust him to you just as I entrusted his brother Yusuf to you before? You took him away, then came back to say he was eaten by the wolf. Allah is He Who is the Guardian, and He is the most capable of extending mercy.”
    65. But when they unloaded and opened their bags, they found their money had been refunded to them, and there they said, “Look, father, what more do we want? There is our money; it has been refunded to us. We will provision our family, guard our brother, and add a camel’s load good at need. It is but a small quantity.”
    66. The father said, “I will not send Benjamin with you until you have given me a binding oath with a solemn appeal to Allah in witness that you will bring him back to me unless you are surrounded.” After they made an oath to him, he said to them, “There, Allah, Who stands guard over what we say, will be our Trustee.”
    67. Ya`qub said to them, “O my sons, do not all enter by the same gate but enter by different gates. Not that I will avail you a misfortune that Allah has meant to befall you. Allah is He Who has the command; in Him do I trust, and in Him must all the faithful put their trust.”
    68. Albeit they entered in the manner according to their father’s advice, it did not mean that they would have escaped a misfortune decreed by Allah; it was only a notion in Ya`qub’s self by which his reason was satisfied. He was imbued with divine knowledge that We had taught him, but most people do not know.
    69. When they came to where Yusuf was, he took his full brother Benjamin by his side and secretly declared to him his identity and said to him, “Do not grieve at heart over what they did to you and me.”
    70. When he was supplying them with their requirement of grain, (the attendants, who had been instructed earlier,) put the king’s cup in Benjamin’s saddlebag. As all of them started to journey homeward, an announcer said, “(You travelers, stop!) You are thieves!” 
    71. The brothers were in terror and turned back and asked, “What is it that you have lost?” 
    72. The attendants said, “We lost the king’s tumbler, and we promise to reward whoever finds it a camel’s load of grain.” And the foreman said, “I am the guarantor.”
    73. The brothers said, “By Allah! You people know that we did not come here to cause corruption, nor are we disposed to theft.”
    74. The attendants said, “What penalty, then, shall be incurred by him who is found guilty of theft if it be established that you are lying?”
    75. Being sure of their innocence, the brothers said, “He who is found guilty of theft shall be the property of the state, for thus do we treat the unjust.”
    76. Yusuf began the search with their sacks before searching that of his brother Benjamin; then he brought the tumbler out of Benjamin’s saddlebag. Thus did We design a stratagem for Yusuf to outwit his brothers. He could not have detained his brother by exercising judicial authority not conformable to the statutes of the realm unless Allah had willed. So it was. We raise whom We will to higher ranks and exalt them in dignity, wisdom, and power. Above everyone having mastery of knowledge, there is one who is endowed with more substantial knowledge; and above everyone with knowledge there is The All-Knowing.
    77. There and then the brothers said, “If he has stolen something, a brother of his had committed theft before.” Yusuf kept this insult to himself and said aside, “You went further and fared worse, and Allah knows every falsity you devise.”
    78. They said to Yusuf, “O you mighty (ruler), he has a father who is advanced in age. Take one of us in his stead; we do see you to be a man of piety and we see you as one of the fair-doers.”
    79. “Allah forbid,” said Yusuf, “that we should take into our custody any but the one with whom we found our personal property or else we will be unjust.”
    80. When they lost hope of persuading Yusuf to change his position, they withdrew and conferred in secret. “Do you not know,” said their eldest, “that your father has bound you by an oath with a solemn appeal to Allah? What about your negligence regarding Yusuf? Therefore, I have resolved never to depart from here until my father has permitted me to do so or Allah has decided for me a course of action; He is The Most Charitable among all judges.
    81. “Go back to your father,” he added, “and say to him: Your son has stolen the king’s cup and we only testify what we know; and when we bound ourselves by the vow, we do not know the Unseen.
    82. “If you are in doubt of what we relate to you, then you may send whom you trust to the city in which we were, to inquire in the matter of the theft, and you may also ask the caravan with whom we came forward, and rest assured that we are telling the truth.”
    83. The rest of the sons went back to Ya`qub (Jacob) and told him the story as instructed by their oldest brother. The news of the loss of his second son saddened him. Ya`qub said, “Indeed, your selves have instigated you to do something evil and impelled you to feign this tale. So patience is most becoming. May Allah bring them all back to me; He is, indeed, All-Knowing and All-Wise.”
    84. He withdrew away from them and retired from their society, weeping and expressing his feeling of grief for the loss of Yusuf. He said, “What a pity it is to lose Yusuf!” And he felt profound grief and mourned so passionately that his eyes turned white and impenetrable to light in the train of his repressed mental pain.
    85. His sons said to him, “By Allah, will you keep on recalling Yusuf to your memory with deep sorrow and weep out your eyes and heart until you are decrepit by disease or perish (in the wreck of sorrow)!”
    86. He said, “I only express my anguish and grief to Allah, and I know from Allah what you, my sons, do not know.
    87. “My sons, go back to your older brother and feel all of you after Yusuf and Benjamin, and do not nurse despair or give up hope of Allah’s relief. Indeed, no one despairs of Allah’s relief but those who disbelieve.”
    88. When the brothers went back and joined the oldest brother and were granted audience of the mighty vizier (Yusuf), they said to him, appealing to his charity, “O mighty one, we and our family have had a severe touch of misfortunes, and the famine has levied distress upon us, and we have brought the little we could afford in exchange for the grain we need. We should be grateful, indeed, if you would give us the full measure of grain and consider the extra you add as charitable alms comforting the poor; blessed, indeed, is he who considers the poor, for Allah rewards the donators.”
    89. Yusuf was remorseful and then said, “Do you know what you did to Yusuf and his brother? You probably are ignorant of the danger and the consequence of what you were doing.”
    90. They said, “Indeed, you are Yusuf, are you not?” “Indeed, I am,” said Yusuf, “and this is my brother Benjamin. Allah has been bounteous to us with His divine favor and benediction and conferred on us prosperity, for he who is pious to Allah and is unwearied in the face of difficulties and able to endure evil will be greatly rewarded. Allah does not waste the reward of the people's  deeds of wisdom and piety.”
    91. They said, “Indeed, Allah has taken you by preference out of all of us (and exalted you in status, rank, and fortune). We do acknowledge our sinful deeds.”
    92. “Today,” said Yusuf, “I cannot reproach you. Allah forgive you, for to Him belong mercy and forgiveness; He is The Most Merciful of all those who show mercy.”
    93. Then Yusuf asked them about his father. When they told him about his loss of sight, Yusuf said, “Go back with this shirt of mine and lay it on my father’s face; he will recover his sight. And bring me all the members of your family.”
    94. When the caravan was on its way homeward, Ya`qub, by divine inspiration, had a presentiment of the event that was about to happen. He said, “I do perceive Yusuf’s scent in the wind, albeit you people might think I am doting.”
    95. But those who were around him harshly said to him, “By Allah, you still live in your old perplexity and error!”
    96. But when the harbinger of good news (the oldest brother) reached home and laid Yusuf’s shirt on his father’s face, Ya`qub recovered his sight and exclaimed, “Did I not tell you that I know from Allah what you people do not know?”
    97. There the sons said to their father, “O father, invoke Allah’s forgiveness on our behalf; we were, indeed, sinners.”
    98. The father said, “I will eventually invoke Allah’s forgiveness on your behalf; my Creator is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    99. When they all had gone to Egypt and were granted audience of Yusuf, he took his parents (father and stepmother) beside him and said to them, “You are most welcome to enter Egypt, where you may dwell, Allah willing, safe and secure.”
    100. And he raised his parents to his (the vizier’s) throne of dignity and authority, and there and then all of them prostrated in reverence. There, Yusuf said to his father, “O father, this is the interpretation of my vision that was brought before during sleep, and Allah has verified it and made it come true. He was gracious to me: He brought to effect my release from prison and your emigration from the desert to settle in the city in Egypt after Satan had sown malevolence and ill will in my brothers’ hearts against me. Indeed, my Lord is Most Kind in what He wills. He is, indeed, All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    101. To express his gratitude to Allah, Yusuf invoked thus: “O Allah, You have graced me with kingship, and You have imparted to me the knowledge of interpreting visions (and what they prefigure of future events). You are He Who generated the heavens and the earth. You are my Guardian here and in the Hereafter. Take me up as a Muslim, O Allah, and join me to those who are righteous.”
    102. Such narrative is of the Unseen, Muhammad, except through Our revelation. Nor were you in their circles when they all (the brothers, the retinue, and the women) resolved to accomplish what they had maliciously schemed.
    103. Nor are most people moved by the convincing divine signs and marvels to believe, even though you, Muhammad, are eager to guide them to all truth.
    104. In fact, you never ask them for a price, nor do you strike a bargain with them for advantaging them of divine knowledge in the Qur’an, which is but a divine illumination and enlightenment revealed to guide mankind to all truth.
    105. In the heavens and the earth there are countless convincing divine signs of the Creator’s existence, oneness, and perfection, but in some way people veer away from them.
    106. Nor do most of them believe in Allah without associating other deities with Him.
    107. Are they certain that they are secure against a destructive torment from Allah, or that the Hour will be striking them at the root, which might well be planted unexpectedly, while they are unaware?
    108. Say to the disbelievers, “This is my way of presenting divine inducements to the people, based on clear and comprehensible evidence—inducements that I, in collaboration with those who follow me, use to invite people to the path of Allah. Glory to Him, and extolled are His glorious attributes! Therefore, I never associate other deities with Him.”
    109. We never sent messengers before you, Muhammad, to whom We revealed but they were men whose deeds were natural to man, chosen from among the town dwellers. Have these people not journeyed through the land and looked at what was the end of those who preceded them? Indeed, the residence in Paradise is infinitely better for those who are pious to Allah as He deserves in life below; can you people not consider?
    110. Our messengers, Muhammad, do face hardships and difficulties, adversities and distresses to the extent that they give up hope of their followers and begin to think that they take them for liars. There and then the turning point is reached, and Our victory comes in good time. We deliver whom We will and punish whom We will, and never is Our violence averted from those who are criminals.
    111. Indeed, there has been an example or a great lesson in the narratives of the Messengers—a lesson guiding those of intellect into abhorrence of impatience and despair. Such narratives as have been disclosed by divine means are not fabricated discourses, but an integral part of the Qur’an, corroborating and authoritatively validating all the divine Books revealed before it and serving as an excellent interpretation expounding all the statutes and ordinances, past and present, revealed to all human beings, exacting obedience from the whole. It is a guidance and mercy to people who believe.


