SURAH 13
AR-R`AD
The Thunder
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah takes its name from thunder, which, we are told, extols Allah. The surah begins by showing the high status of the Qur’an and by declaring that it is revealed by Allah. Then it shows Allah’s supremacy over the universe and draws attention to its marvelous creation. The surah then moves from the absolute power of Allah Almighty over creation to that of His power over re-creation and resurrection. Allah has knowledge of everything, and His power to afflict punishment in this world is a token of the punishment in the Hereafter.
    Then the surah calls attention to the striking miracles in the universe. Allah shows the attitude of people toward receiving the Qur’anic guidance: the characteristics of believers and the lack of morals of the disbelievers and their adamancy in demanding miracles. The surah also shows how badly they mocked at their messenger and informs the Prophet that messengers before him were also mocked. But Allah Almighty has supremacy over all things and all creatures, and He will requite all as they deserve. He further tells us that the Qur’an is the supreme miracle that will continue to exist until the Day of Resurrection; that it is Allah Almighty Who provides His messengers with miracles if He wills; and that if the disbelievers deny the Prophet’s mission, Allah bears witness to its truth—a testimony that is enough for him.
 
    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). R (ra). The surah opens with these letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated. These are divinely revealed verses of the Qur’an distinctly indicating that all that has been revealed to you, Muhammad, is from Allah. It is the truth guiding to all truth, but most people do not believe.
    2. Allah Who sent down this Book is He Who raised the heavens with their heavenly bodies—super structures that are kept aloft without visible pillars. Then He levelled Himself on the Throne of supremacy and dominion, of grace and mercy, and subjected the sun and the moon to a state of subservience, each orbiting for a determined period of time. He conducts the Command over all affairs and expounds His revelations and clearly displays His cosmic signs and renders His words readily understood so that you people may have certitude that you will inevitably assemble before Him at the predetermined time.		 
    3. He it is Who extended the earth, spreading it out for you to go east and west, and in it He placed mountains, fixed as with an anchor, and rivers with copious streams of fresh water, and of every fruit He produced a pair, male and female. He enshrouded the day with the veil of the night. Indeed, in the universe and its wonders are signs Allah’s omnipotence and authority, which are sensed by those who meditate.
    4. And in the earth are areas bordering each other, orchards of vines, edible grain, and palm trees bearing clusters of dates on one stem or on more than one stem, arising from the same root, nourished with the same water. Yet We make the produce of one unlike that of the other in quality and quantity, and We prefer some in taste over others. Indeed, in these wonders are signs sensed by those who consider.
    5. What strikes you with wonder is their astonishment. They say, “Do you believe that after we have been reduced to dust, we will be restored to life and be created anew?” This is, indeed, flat blasphemy thought and felt by those who decisively disbelieve in their Lord, and these are they who will be fettered with shackles round their necks, and these are the inmates of Hell, wherein they will have eternal suffering.
    6. They defiantly ask you, Muhammad, to hasten the promised punishment instead of seeking the truth and hoping for Allah’s mercy, albeit they heard of the typical instances of the past, forming particular cases of a principle and instances of punishment. Nonetheless, Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving. He extends His forgiveness to people despite their unjust actions, but surely your Lord also punishes severely.
    7. Yet the disbelievers defiantly say, “If only a sign other than the Qur’an (such as moving mountains) were revealed to him to evince the truth of his mission!” But you are only a warner, and to every nation Allah sent a guide to the truth, with a miracle supporting his mission. (They are not in a position to choose; they only have to answer the challenge of bringing the like of this Qur’an.)
    8. Allah, The All-Knowing, knows what every female bears (in her womb), not only in terms of the wombs subsiding or exceeding, but also its determined future (in terms of misery or happiness, belief or disbelief, wealth or poverty, life span, as well as all other matters in this world). 
    9. He is All-Knowing. He knows the invisible and the seen. He is uniquely and imposingly The Great, The Exalted (and He is infinitely far above the whole and all in all).
    10. Indeed, everything that is said or done comes to His knowledge, whether it be expressed in thoughts or in words, and whether it be said or done by one who hides under the veil of night or by one who moves about in daylight.
    11. Each and every one has a succession of guardian angels guarding him before and after him upon Allah’s high Command. Allah does not change the state of life of a given people until the people have changed the state of their innermost beings. And when it is His will that a people be stricken with a misfortune, no expedient whatever nor anyone can turn it back, and besides Him they have no patron.
    12. It is He Who exhibits to view the lightening that strikes you people with the feeling of fear. It might bring suffering, strike one dead, or engender a storm. Or you may have the feeling of hope of rainfall (to revive the land that has been stricken with drought). And it is He Who engenders the thick clouds.
    13. And thunder, like the rest of His creation, as it declares itself, extols His praises, and so do the angels, whom you cannot see, because of fright of Him. He sends the engendered thunderbolts wherever He wills to strike therewith whom He wills. Yet the disbelievers dispute about Allah, when He is The All-Powerful and The All-Mighty Who strikes at the root in punishment.
    14.  The call for truth that guides to all truth is asserted as Allah’s own; whereas those objects they worship and invoke besides Him do not respond to them any more than the thirsty one who stretches out his hand to lift water to his gaping mouth but it never reaches his mouth. Indeed, the invocation of the disbelievers is simply worthless and leads them to error.
    15. To Allah, Who controls the fate of all, do all beings  in the heavens and on earth prostrate themselves—to His government and to His supreme controlling power—willingly or unwillingly. So do the shadows they cast on the ground by the intercepted sunrays in the forenoons and afternoons*.
-----------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    
    16. Ask them, Muhammad, “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” And say to them, “It is Allah.” And ask them, “Have you taken besides Him other deities who have no control over what befalls them of good or harm?” Ask them, “Do you consider equal the one without the sense of sight with the other who perceives objects by sight? Are darknesses equal to light?” Or did those whom they associate with Allah call into existence or form out of nothingness any creature, animate or inanimate, identical with any of those created by Allah, to the extent that they seem alike to them? Say to them, “It is Allah Who is the Creator of everything; He is the One and Only Vanquisher (the supreme controlling power inherent in the whole and in all in all).”
    17. He sends the rainwater from the heaven, and there it is conveyed along valleys of various capacities in due measure. Where the flood flows, it drives before it unworthy scum and impurities floating on the surface gathering into a heap of froth resembling the foamy admixture and impurities mounting to the surface of the heated ores for the separation of precious metals used for ornaments and other uses. Thus does Allah give examples with allegorical representations of truth and untruth. The froth and the scum are rejected and disappear; whereas what is profitable to the people remains behind on earth. Thus Allah strikes the similitudes.
    18. Those who respond favorably to their Lord are the recipients of Allah’s blessings and gratifying rewards; whereas those who do not respond are losers. If they have all things on earth and the like of it with it, they would gladly give it as ransom of their guilt at Judgment, but far from it. (These and their like must expect a manifest discomfort). Much misery and hardship will be the insignia of their reckoning when the account of their life and conduct is rendered at Judgment. Their abode is Hell, and evil indeed is the bed they have made for themselves.
    19. Does he who is certain of the truth of your mission, Muhammad, and who knows that all that has been revealed to you from Allah is the truth guiding to all truth, compare with him who is blind? Indeed, those who believe in Allah are people of insight—those who are imbued with intellects by which they perceive, know and judge; 
    20. Those who fulfil the covenant of Allah and to Him they render their vows, and they do not breach a legal or a moral bond nor an obligation or a promise; 
    21. Those who join together all that Allah has ordained to be joined together and who are apprehensive of Allah, and they fear the misery and hardship experienced at Judgment;
    22. Those who patiently seek the Face of their Lord purposed to fulfill their obligation to Allah and to satisfy their conscience and their hearts; those who duly engage in prayer and spend in benevolence and benefaction, secretly or openly, of the provisions of life We granted them, and who repel pride with prudence and evil with good. Such persons will have eternity in the heavenly and blissful abode, Paradise,
    23. Enjoying themselves in the Gardens of Eden. They are heartily welcomed together with those who are righteous among their parents, their mates, and their progeny; and there they will be visited by the angels, who make entry through every gate
    24. To bid them welcome and greet them with “Peace be upon you for your patience and endurance; how excellent and how blissful is this eternal residence!”
    25. Those who break their covenant with Allah after they have solemnly vowed to Him to do what has been enjoined—disjoining humanity instead of joining them, and disjoining all that Allah has ordained be joined together and making corruption on earth—will be losers. These and such persons have come within the measure of Allah’s curse, and in their final abode they will have eternal suffering.
    26. Allah gives livelihood generously and confers support gratuitously on whom He wills, and He also gives with restraint and by measure to whom He wills. The worldly minded rejoice beyond a common joy with life here below before the Hereafter. But how little are the material and the immaterial things that minister to enjoyment and content here as compared with the Hereafter.
    27. Yet the disbelievers insolently say, “If only a sign (other than the Qur’an) were revealed to him from his Lord to prove his mission!” Say to them, “Indeed, Allah misleads whom He decides, and He guides those who lift to Him their penitence.”
    28. Their hearts become quiet and composed at the remembrance of Allah. Indeed, at the remembrance of Allah do hearts find peace, repose, and tranquility.
    29. Those who believe in Allah have hearts impressed with religious deeds. Blessed are they with the beatitude of Heaven and eternity in perpetual resort.
    30. Thus have We sent you, Prophet, to a people before whom generations who received messengers have passed away, so that you recite to them Our divine revelations and narrate to them all that We have revealed to you, notwithstanding that they disbelieve in Ar-Rahman, The All-Merciful, and His mercy, and their hearts dare rise defiant against Him. Say to them, “He is my Lord. There is no god but Him; in Him do I trust, and to Him do I humbly repent.”
    31. And if there were a Qur’an that has a firm place in the realm of fact, a word by which mountains could be set in motion or the earth be torn apart or the dead be spoken to, it would be (none other than) this Qur’an. But command, control, domination, and decision are asserted as Allah’s own. Further, do those who believe not realize that if Allah had willed, He could have guided mankind as a whole to His path of righteousness? Nonetheless, disbelieve in Allah will not cease to be bombarded with smiter hitting them directly in requital of their evil deeds, or hitting them close enough to their homes until Allah’s promised (punishment) comes to pass. Allah never fails to keep His promise.
    32. O Prophet, messengers sent before you were also mocked at. The disbelievers mocked at them. But despite their wickedness, I put their punishment in respite; then I cast them down from a position of prosperity and power and brought them to ruin, and how unbearable was the punishment!
    33. Does He Who stands guard over every self, and His sentinel angels record every deed that is done or in the making, and to Whose knowledge everything comes instantaneously compare with a false object of worship or a helpless creature or dumb idols whom they called holy gods? Yet they still associate other deities with Allah. Say to them, “Name them, or do you inform Allah of objects on earth that He has no knowledge of?” The fact is that the disbelievers’ intrigues and cunning allured them to brighter words and led them to a path other than that of righteousness. And he whom Allah misguides will find no one to guide him.
    34. They have torment in this world, and worse will be the torment in the world to come; and no one can afford them protection from Allah.
    35. To represent in words the Paradise promised the pious by Allah —it is the Garden of bliss and delight, of protection and security beneath which rivers flow. Its fruits and its shade are eternal, and therein they will have eternity of joy. This is the destination of those who are pious to  Allah as He deserves; whereas the intended end of those disbelievers is the fire of Hell.
    36. The People of the Book rejoice at the Qur’an and at all that has been revealed to you, Prophet. They find in it an extension of the basic principles of the oneness of Allah; the validation of previous Scriptures; and the unity of purpose, feeling, and action. But among the sects are those who reject some parts. Say to them, “I have been commanded to worship Allah and never to associate other deities with Him and to Him I call; and to Him will all return.”
    37. And thus did We send down the Qur’an (as the constitution of Our sovereign power) in Arabic. And should you, Muhammad, be inclined to follow the prejudices after divine knowledge has been imparted to you, then you will have lost Allah’s patronage and protection. (This is addressed to the Prophet and to the believers, to whom the warning is real.)
    38. We sent messengers before you, Muhammad, who were human, and We entered them into matrimony, and We gave them offspring, and it was not for any of them to work a sign of his own; their signs were authorized by Allah and were imparted to them as He ordained. Every period of time has its divine Book and appropriate sign.
    39. Allah erases whatever He wills as He wills, and He confirms what He wills, and this and that are put on record in the (Mother) Essence of the Book in Heaven.
    40. And We either show you, Muhammad, in your lifetime some part of the punishment We promised them or We occasion your death before that. You are only responsible for relating the divine message, and We are responsible for their reckoning on the Day of Judgment.
    41. Do the disbelievers not see that We reduce the earth from its outlying borders? And Allah is He Who commands, and no one will ever be able to reverse His judicial decision; He is swift, indeed, in reckoning.
    42. Their predecessors schemed, and the wicked plotted against the messengers, but who can get the better of Allah’s plans or defeat His predetermined events? He is the Master Who controls all plans at will. He has absolute power and knows all that each self earns of qualities, actions, and deeds. The day will come when the disbelievers know with much regret to whom belongs eternity in the heavenly and blissful residence!
    43. Thus still, the disbelievers say to you, “You are not sent by Allah, nor are you charged with a message from Him to mankind.” Say to them, “Good enough for me is Allah as a witness of my actions and of your actions. He knows the truth of the Qur’an and of every Book, and so do those who have knowledge of the Book.”

