SURAH 14
IBRAHIM
Abraham
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah proclaims the duty of the messengers of Allah and the value attached to the Books they have been given. The prophets are all human beings who are sent as signs and warnings, but they are totally unable to produce a supernatural act without Allah’s will and authorization, nor can they guide anyone to the path of righteousness and out of darkness to light and enlightenment without His permission. The surah gives parables beginning with life here and ending with life in the Hereafter; it portrays those who are thankful in contrast to those who are ungrateful. It indicates that, generally speaking, man is not truly grateful. Yet, if people consider Allah’s favors, they will find them countless, but those who lift to Allah their inward sight ponder His revelations and signs and endure misfortunes, and contentment live ever in their thankful hearts. The surah ends by mentioning Allah’s omnipotence to render many of the physical forces subservient to man. It shows that more things are wrought by prayer than this world dreams of, and this is beautifully illustrated in Ibrahim’s (Abraham’s) message and character. 

    1. A (alif). L (lam). R (ra). The surah opens with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated. A Book (the Qur’an) the source of enlightenment—We have sent it down to you, Muhammad, to guide people to all truth and to lead them, by the permission of their Lord, out of darkness into illumination and enlightenment, and to direct them to the path of righteousness, the path of Allah The All-Mighty and The Owner of all praise (to Whom are extolled the glorious attributes),
    2. Allah, to Whom belong all that is in the heavens and on earth. Woe to the disbelievers who deny Him. They will pass to eternal torment.
    3. Those worldly minded who hold the world below better than the Hereafter, who do not seek grace to guide their choice and stand in the way to prevent Allah’s path to  truth from guiding people to all truth, making it their aim to pervert the truth and crook the path of righteousness to their own ends, are losers. These and their like are, indeed, lost in far error.
    4. We never sent to a people a messenger who did not master their tongue; so he made himself understood, distinctly expressing all that is meant. There and then Allah misguides whom He wills and guides to His path of righteousness whom He wills, and He is The All-Mighty and The All-Wise.
    5. We sent Musa (Moses) with Our signs pointing to Allah’s authority, and We commanded him to guide his people to all truth and lead them out of darknesses and out of want of spiritual and intellectual sight into illumination and enlightenment. We enjoined him to remind them of the eventful days of Allah, His means of trial, and His mode of action for every patient, thankful person.
    6. And there, Musa said to them, “My people, remember Allah’s grace and blessings that He imparted to you. He delivered you from the house of Pharaoh who laid upon you cruel impositions and intolerable torment. They brutally slaughtered your sons and spared your women in humiliation, and this was, indeed, a severe but sure test from your Lord of your actions and reactions echoing your true beliefs and the prevalent inclination among you.
    7. “And in consequence Allah proclaimed, ‘If you are thankful, I will make all grace increase in you, but if you show disbelief, then you must realize that My torment is, indeed, severe.’”
    8. And Musa added, “Should you disbelieve and, together with all those living on earth, inclined to disobedience, then you must realize that Allah is Absolutely Affluent, Praiseworthy (and Independent and His glorious attributes are extolled).”
    9. Have you people not been informed of what became of your predecessors—the people of Nuh (Noah) and those of `Ad and the people of Thamud and their successors whom no one knows but Allah? Their messengers brought them evident and plain revelations guiding out of darkness and into illumination and enlightenment. But they drew their hands across their lips to indicate their refusal to accept the divine message and said, “We flatly disbelieve the truth of your mission and we are in doubt of the system of faith that you invite us to follow. It excites suspicion.”
    10. Their messengers said to them, “Can there be doubt about Allah when it is He Who generated the heavens and the earth and brought them into existence, and He calls you to His worship so that you qualify to receive His blessings and the forgiveness of your sins? He grants you respite to confess yourselves mistaken and He puts you in respite up to a predetermined point of time.” They said, “But you are simply mortals like us and you just want us to turn our backs upon the gods our fathers worshipped! Give us then solid evidence and authority that prove the conclusion.”
    11. Their messengers said to them, “But we are only mortals like you, and Allah imparts His bounty to those of His worshipers whom He chooses as He wills, and it is not within our power to present you with authority except with Allah’s delegated power and authorization. And in Allah do the believers  put their trust.
    12. “And why should we not put our trust in Allah when He has guided us to His path leading us to righteousness and endure unjust affliction! And in Allah should all those who trust put their trust.”
    13. And the brutal disbelievers insolently and defiantly said to their messengers, “We will most certainly oust you from your homes and drive you out of our land unless you return to our creed and worship.” But Allah revealed to them confidence and assured them thus: “We will put the unjust wrongdoers to rout.
    14. “And We will dwell you in their land to make abode after We have destroyed them. This is a favor that We confer only on him who entertains the profound reverence due to Me and regards the moment he assembles before Me with reverence and threat.”
    15. The messengers prayed for victory, but the hopes of every stubborn transgressor are doomed to disappointment.
    16. He is defeated in this world, and Hell is in his pursuit, and offensive festering water will be his drink.
    17. He drinks of it by sips that he can hardly swallow, but then he will drink up the dregs of it forever, and over him death shakes his dart, but he will not die, and the torment laid upon the damned will be in his pursuit.
    18. Those disbelievers in their Lord will be losers. Their efforts are useless and are like ashes that are exposed to violent high winds scattering them in all directions. They are unable to benefit themselves of what they have earned, and this is error in the extreme.
    19. O Man, can you not see that Allah created the heavens and the earth and brought them into existence in truth, and if He wills He can do away with you and replace you by a new creation.
    20. And this would not be a mighty act for Him to accomplish.
    21. And when all the disbelievers have emerged from the graves and assembled before Allah at Judgment, the weak who lacked strength of purpose will say to those who were proud, “We were your followers. Are you now going to carry, on our behalf, a share of Allah’s torment laid upon the damned?” The proud will answer, “If Allah had guided us to His path of righteousness, We would have guided you to it; now it is all the same whether we be impatient or patient, and never will we be able to evade (torment).”
    22. Then Satan, when the Command is decreed, will say to those whose hopes were doomed to disappointment, “Allah promised you the truth affording expectation of all that is good, showing signs of future excellence. I also promised you and afforded you expectation of all that would seem good and allure you to brighter worlds. But as was expected, I broke my promise. I had no authority over you; I simply presented you with false inducements attracting your attention and influencing your appetites, and I led the way. Therefore, do not blame me, but you should lay the blame upon yourselves. I cannot help you now, nor can you save me, either, from the torment laid upon the damned. Indeed, I disbelieve in your idea of associating me with Allah; the unjust wrongdoers are destined to painful torment.”
    23. But those who believed and did righteous deeds have been enrolled as the honored inmates of the beatitude of Heaven in blissful gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will have eternity, Allah permitting, feeling security and peace of mind: “Peace.”
    24. Do you not see, people, how Allah exemplifies the good word of truth? It is like a blessed fruit tree whose roots are firmly planted and whose branches are springing out towards heaven.
    25. It yields its produce, its Lord willing, periodically in season. Allah sets forth parables by which mankind would remind themselves.
    26. A wicked word stands like an wicked tree: it may flourish to begin with, but soon enough it is uprooted from the surface of the earth. It does not have the strength to grow erect, nor does it eventually grow at all.
    27. Allah confirms those who believe in opinion, action, purpose, and in their words of truth expressing their thoughts and corroborating their faith in life here and at judgment in the Hereafter. Allah misguides the unjust wrongdoers, and Allah accomplishes what He decides.
    28. Have you not seen, O Man, into the way these disbelievers act? They exchange the efficacious grace of Allah for disobedience and infidelity and set up their people in the abode of futility.
    29. The abode is Hell wherein they are enveloped in flames; and miserable, indeed, is the repository.
    30. And they set to Allah compeers presumptuously possessing a like degree of quality or attribute and at the same level of dignity, power, and excellence to lead people into error and in the wrong direction. Say to them, Muhammad, “Enjoy yourselves; you have decided your own destiny to the Fire.”
    31. O Muhammad, say to My servants who believe that they should engage in the act of prayer and spend, secretly or openly, of the provisions of life that We provisioned them with before the Day comes when there will be no trading nor fellowship.
    32. Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and sent down from heaven rainwater causing the various products to spring up from the soil—products fit to be used as food for human sustenance. He subjected the ships under your dominion to be buoyant by His Command. He ordered the rivers in subservience to your advantage to provide water for you and your plants.
    33. He subjected for you the sun and the moon, constantly revolving their paths, and the night and the day were not subjected but to serve you.
    34. And He made all grace abound in you. He gave you of everything you asked for, and if you were to count the divine favors, you would find them out of all count. But man is, indeed, most unjust most disbelieving.
    35. And mention, Prophet, to your nation what Ibrahim (Abraham) expressed in a prayer: “O my Lord, may I ask You to confer on this city (Makkah) security and make it afford a safe retreat and freedom of fear and anxiety, and guard me, O Allah, and my progeny from worshiping idols.
    36. “These objects of worship, O my Lord, have allured many people who strayed from Your path of righteousness; therefore, he who follows me and submits to Your system of faith and worship will be an integral part of me, and he who disobeys me will be left to plead his causes and You decide them. You are Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    37. “Our Lord, I have made some of my offspring take abode in an uncultivated valley in the vicinity of Your Inviolable House to engage in the act of worship. Let the hearts of people, O Allah, yearn toward them with tenderness and affection, and provide them with the fruits of the earth so that they may be thankful.
    38. “You know, Our Lord, all our thoughts and all that our hearts conceal, and You know all that we say in public, and simply nothing whatsoever is concealed from Allah, be it on earth or in the heavens.
    39. “My heart swells and answers thanks to Allah, Who has bestowed upon me in my old age with the procreation of Isma`il (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac). Indeed, Allah, is All-Hearing, and He responds to invocation.
    40. “O my Lord, help me express my gratitude to You in the act of prayer, and make me and those whom You will of my offspring devout with prayer. My Lord, and grant me  my humble invocations.
    41. “Our Lord, extend Your mercy and forgiveness to me, to my parents, and to the believers on the Day of Judgment when all will answer for their conduct and render an account of their lives.”
    42. Do not think, O Messenger, that Allah is heedless of the doings of the unjust wrongdoers. He only defers their punishment to a Day when they stand gazing fixedly with their eyes wide open in horror.
    43. They rush at an excessive pace with hearts sinking, lifting up their heads in supplication for forgiveness. Their eyes cannot blink; they are fixedly gazed wide open in terror, and their heart-sights are empty of intellect and of all hope.
    44. Therefore, warn people, O Messenger, of the Day when they are overtaken by Allah’s torment. Then the unjust wrongdoers will say, “Our Lord, if only You would delay our punishment for a term close at hand, we will apprehend the voice from heaven and follow the messengers.” But they will be told, “Did you not swear before that you will never suffer extinction either in life or in the Hereafter?
    45. “You dwelt in the dwellings of those who were unjust wrongdoers, and much did you apprehend the quiet of their cities, which was purchased by the ruin of their land (and the ultimate wretchedness of both). And We put forth to you parables by which moral and spiritual relations were typically set forth.”
    46. Yet, with cleverness in scheming, the Makkan disbelievers had recourse to stratagem, but all their scheming is with Allah, notwithstanding that their scheming is so overreaching that it removes mountains.
    47. Therefore, do not think, Messenger, that Allah will fail His promise to His messengers. Allah is All-Mighty, indeed, and He justly avenges His own right.
    48. Such a punishment will come into effect on the Day when the planet earth is changed to another planet and the heavens, too. And there, the people emerge from their graves and assemble before Allah, The One, and The Only Who vanquishes all.
    49. There and then you will see the criminals bound together in fetters (with their devils),
    50. Vested in skins of pitch with their faces enveloped in a veil of flames.
    51. And in accord with equity and justice, Allah will requite every self with what is commensurate with its qualities and worldly deeds. Surely Allah is Swif at reckoning.
    52. This is a proclamation sent (from Allah) to His Messenger to use as a warning to all and to spread it in the wide circle of all so that they may, it is hoped, know that He is One God and that those endowed with intellects may remember.

