SURAH 15
AL-HIJR
The Rocky Territory
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah starts with letters of the Arabic alphabet to call attention to the fact that the Qur’an is composed of the letters that form words. Despite this, it cannot be emulated because it is revealed by Allah. These letters have long vowels, which draw the attention of those who turn their backs to the Qur’an and call them to listen to it so that they might benefit from it and be guided by Allah The All-Mighty.
    The surah gives examples of what befell previous nations and points out how past prophets were received by their people. It refers to the divine signs of Allah in the universe, such as the heaven and the constellations, level land, firm mountains, clouds carrying water, and pollen of trees and plants.
    The surah deals with the very first battle in creation between the accursed Iblis (Satan) on the one hand, and Adam and his wife on the other. It shows that this battle between good and evil is going on until the end of this life, when evil will be punished and goodness will be rewarded on the Day of Resurrection. Following this, Allah narrates the stories of the Prophets Ibrahim (Abraham) and Lut (Lot) and that of the people of the rocky territory (al-hijr). The surah also points out the high status of the Qur’an, how the disbelievers received it, and what the Prophet should do in view of their denial of it—namely, to proclaim his mission and make it publicly known, and to worship Allah until he (the Prophet) inevitably passes away.
 
    1. A (alif). L (lam). R (ra). The surah opens with these letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated. These are divine verses of the Book and a perspicuous Qur’an, which stands evident of enlightenment and imparts knowledge, and wisdom.
    2. Perhaps the Day will come sooner than expected when those who disbelieved Allah wish they had conformed to Islam as ordained by Him.
    3. Let them feast their senses with infidelity and disobedience and experience with delight the pleasure they draw from such a disposition and be fooled by their hopes; they will come to know that they are doomed to disappointment.
    4. If they ask for worldly punishment like what Allah inflicted on previous nations, let them know that We never destroyed a town, a people, or a nation but according to a known Book (time).
    5. Nor can a people or a nation hasten their own term earlier than the predetermined date, nor can they delay it either.
    6. Acting against their own best interests, they accuse the Messenger of falsehood. They mockingly say to him, “O you who claim to have received the divine message from Heaven, you are indeed a madman.
    7. “Why then, do you not bring down the angels to substantiate your claim if indeed you are declaring the truth?”
    8. They do not realize that We do not send down the angels except with the Truth (to execute Allah’s decrees). And if We do send them down, the disbelievers will be respited.
    9. We have sent down the Qur’an, featuring the virtuous divine message of truth that will never suffer eclipse, and with Us is its preservation against corruption, addition, or loss.
    10. We sent messengers before you, O honorable Messenger, to the various sects of the distant past who were adherents of different systems of faith and worship.
    11. And never did a messenger present himself to them but he suffered malicious mockery and was laughed to scorn (exactly as they are doing to you).
    12. Even as We made the Qur’an enter the hearts of the believers and enlighten them, We let disbelief enter the hearts of the criminals who grow more and more wicked.
    13. They just refuse to accept his message, notwithstanding that Allah’s enactment (of punishment), which has long been pursued in the past for each typical instance, will not alter.
    14. And if We were to open to them a gate in Heaven to provide a free passage so as to admit their continued ascent into the realm, they would not believe.
    15. And they would still say, “This is an eye trap. Our eyes have been confused. In fact, we have been bewitched.”
    16. We established in the heavens stars and constellations, and We adorned them with qualities affording keen pleasure to the onlookers.
    17. And We guarded them from disturbing satanic forces and from those with characteristics befitting Satan the outcast.
    18. He who peers inquisitively into the realm to steal whatever comes to his hearing of the speech of the inhabitants of these stars is pursued by a flame of fire (that does not miss).
    19. And We spread out and stretched the earth and furnished it with anchorages (mountains) placed in a certain setting, fixed as with an anchor, and therein did We produce and cause to grow a set of every kind which (preserves your life and) speaks of the bearing of proportion.
    20. And We provisioned you thereon with livelihood, and We provisioned those creatures for which you are not responsible for the necessities of life. 
    21. No material or immaterial object but We have infinite treasuries thereof, and what We release from all and each and send down to meet the needs is determined by due estimate.
    22. And We send the wind as an agent of fertilization in plants, and it impregnates also the clouds, and there issues the rain We send down from heaven, and We afford you water to drink. It is not under your dominion or control that you can lay it up in store.
    23. And it is We alone Who give life and occasion the moment of death, and, indeed, it is We Who are in the end the Inheritor of the heavens and the earth.
    24. And We already know those of you whose turn to die comes first, and We already know those of you who would follow later.
    25. And it is Allah Who will muster them all at Judgment. He is indeed All-Wise and All-Knowing.
    26. And We created man from dried clay, a product of dark clay that has been modeled.
    27. And the jinn We created earlier from a fiery blast of fiercely hot wind.
    28. And mention, Prophet, the origin of creation, when for once Allah said to the angels, “I am creating a human from dried clay, the product of dark modeling clay.
    29. “And when I have fashioned it and furnished it with a definite shape and imparted to it My spirit, then prostrate yourselves to him (in greeting and admiration).”
    30. There and then did the angels cast themselves down prostrate all of them together.
    31. Except Iblis (Satan), who refused to join the angels who prostrated themselves in obeisance to Allah.
    32. “What kept you, Iblis,” Allah asked, “from joining those who prostrated themselves down (in greeting and admiration)?”
    33. Iblis said, “It is not I who would cast himself down in prostration to a mortal whom You created from dried clay, a product of dark modeling clay.”
    34. “Then get out of Paradise,” Allah said. “You are dismissed and outcast.
    35. “And the curse will pursue you till the Day of Judgment (when you and your followers will be punished).”
    36. Then Iblis requested, “O my Lord, respite my condemnation till the Day of Resurrection.”
    37. “Respite is granted to you,” Allah said.
    38. “Till the specified Day on which the point of time has been predetermined. No matter how long it is, it is limited.”
    39. Iblis said, “O my Lord, now that You have destined me and I have erred, I will entangle them with adornment, and I will misguide them all.
    40. “But not the devout among Your worshipers whose hearts have been touched with the divine faith.”
    41. Allah said, “This is the path the devout tread. It is the path of righteousness that leads straight to Me.
    42. “My devout worshipers do not come under your authority, nor do you have the power to influence their conduct and actions; you only have influence over those misguided who follow you and in vanity they waste their days.
    43. “And Hell is, indeed, the destination wherein they will all make their promised abode.”
    44. It has seven gates through each of which will enter those appropriated to the degree of suffering that is appointed for their evil deeds.
    45. Whereas those who have piety towards Allah as He deserves will be blessed with divine favor. They are destined to make abode in blissful Gardens in the beatitude of Heaven watered with running springs.
    46. They will be addressed thus: “Make entry into Paradise. We bid you a hearty welcome wherein you will live in peace, safe and secure.”
    47. And We will have erased rancor from their breasts; now they are an association of brothers seated on settees of dignity facing each other.
    48. There and then they are not overtaken by toil, and they will not be asked to leave or depart therefrom.
    49. Tell My servants, O honorable Prophet, that I am, indeed, The Oft- Forgiving and The Ever-Merciful.
    50. And also tell them that My torment is indeed painful; it is the torment laid upon the damned.
    51. And inform them, Prophet, of the (disguised) angels who were the guests of Ibrahim (Abraham).
    52. When they entered his home and greeted him with the expression of good will, “Peace,” he recoiled back and said, "We feel tremulous of you".
    53. “Do not be tremulous,” they said. “We are here to announce to you the birth of a son Ishaq (Isaac), who will be imbued with wisdom and divine knowledge.”
    54. Ibrahim said, “How can you give me such news when I have been carried through age to advanced life? Is this glad tiding that you are telling me?”
    55. They said, “We have told you the glad truth and, therefore, do not entertain the idea that the thing that seems hopeless makes you despondent of Allah’s mercy.”
    56. “Those who would be despondent of Allah’s mercy,” Ibrahim said, “are only the ones who are lost in the maze of error!
    57. “And now, what is the mission on which you messengers have been sent by Allah?”
    58. “We have been sent,” the messengers said, “to a criminal people who grow more and more wicked, the people of Lut (Lot).
    59. “But not the family of Lut, all of whom Allah has commanded us to save,
    60. “Excepting his wife, who did not follow her husband but was with those laggards who deserve the torment.”
    61. And when the messengers presented themselves to Lut,
    62. He said to them, “You are strangers who are foreign to me.”
    63. “But,” said the messengers, “we have brought you pleasant news, the answer to the problem of those who wrangled with your divine message.
    64. “And we have brought you the truth, and we conduct ourselves sincerely in accordance with the divine standard.
    65. “Just escort your family and take them out of this town in the dead hours of the night, walking behind them, and none of you shall look in the direction from which you have left but keep going to where you are commanded.”
    66. And We informed him of this command: “These wicked people shall be uprooted by morning.”
    67. In the meantime there came the city dwellers, displaying their pleasure and joyous delight at the thought of the presence of young men.
    68. “These are my guests,” said Lut. “I beg you not to bring shame upon me.
    69. “And be pious to Allah and do not disgrace me.”
    70. “Did we not forbid you,” they said, “to entertain people in your house (and prevent us to do what we desire)?”
    71. “There,” said Lut, “you may wed my daughters if you must exercise your desire.”
    72. “By your life, O Prophet,” he was told, “the wicked are wandering here and there being deceived by their blundering in their stupor.”
    73. And there it was: a single shout from Heaven stirred up a merciless blast, which overtook them by sunrise.
    74. And We turned those cities (Sodom and Gomorrah) upside down and rained them with brimstones as hard as baked clay.
    75. These are indeed divine signs making a deep impression on those scrutinizers.
    76. And the evidence still stands on the way as a scene of dismal devastation to the travelers (in the neighborhood of the Dead Sea).
    77. This is indeed a meaningful sign that is quite impressive to the believers.
    78. Thus much did the woodlander people of Madyan wrong themselves and their messenger and were unjust.		
    79. And in consequence We took just vengeance on them, and both sites stand evident of the events on a course of travel where people can see.
    80. Similarly did the dwellers of the rocky territory (the Thamud) deny the truth of the divine message conveyed to them by the messengers (and were wrongdoers).
    81. And We presented them with Our signs betokening omnipotence and authority, but they took objection against them and veered away.
    82. And they hewed the mountains into homes wherein they dwelled and enjoyed safety and security.
    83. Nonetheless, a single shout from Heaven’s realm overtook them by daylight.
    84. And so be it; what they gained of riches and enjoyed of safety did not avail them nor help them avoid destruction.
    85. Nor did We create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them but in accordance with truth (and for just ends). And the final predetermined Hour is inevitably coming; therefore, Muhammad, pardon your opponent’s human instability with gracious forgiveness.
    86. For, it is Allah, indeed, Who is the Creator of the whole and of all in all, and He is The All-Knowing.
    87. And We have given you, O honorable Prophet, seven verses of the Qur’an opening in Allah’s Name: in praise, in thanks, in action, and in prayer, and the magnificent Qur’an (which is eminently entitled to the designation, The Great).
    88. Do not direct your sight wistfully, Messenger, at the advantages We gave to some of the disbelievers among the various sects, nor grieve at heart for their disobedience to Allah. And be soft in temper and disposition to the believers and lower your wing to them.
    89. And say, “I hereby declare to all disbelievers that I am delegated by Allah to make evident His warning against denying Him and His laws.”
    90. Just as We had sent down a warning to those who treated Our Scriptures (in the way it suited them, dividing them into parts, accepting some, and rejecting others).
    91. And together with the disbelievers they schemed to discredit the Qur’an by fragmenting it into parts, labeling some as sheer poetry, some as legend, and others as divine.
    92. But by your Lord, your Creator, there will come the Day when all of them will have much to answer for.
    93. And all their misdeeds will be laid to their charge.
    94. Therefore, you just proclaim Allah’s message, Muhammad, and proclaim all that you have been commanded to declare and veer away from those who associate other deities with Him.
    95. We have guarded you from the danger of those who hold the truth in mockery, and We maintain your cause against their cunning.
    96. And they associate other deities with Allah, but soon will they know and experience the losses and injuries that are the consequence of their crimes.
    97. And We do know how much their vain talk straitens your breast and oppresses your thoughts and your feelings.
    98. But extols with praise Allah and His glorious attributes and join yourself to those who prostrate themselves to Him.
    99. And worship Allah your Creator until the encounter with death, which is, indeed, a matter of certainty.

