SURAH 16
AN-NAHL
The Bees
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed at Makkah, except for the last three verses, which were revealed at Madinah. The surah starts with an assurance of the punishment that will be inflicted on those who associate other deities with Allah and a statement of Allah’s ability to carry out His decree, a token of which is the creation of the heavens and the earth. Allah then mentions His blessings bestowed on all people. These blessings entail the necessity of thanking Him and worshiping Him alone.
    The surah also portrays how those who associate other deities with Allah received the call to the oneness of Allah, made false allegations against the glorious Qur’an, and claimed that it was fables of old. Then Allah points out the torment of those who associate others with Him on the Day of Resurrection and the bliss of the believers. He mentions the polytheists’ adamant denial of the resurrection. Allah counters their denial by showing how feeble they are. He confirms His promise to the righteous and His threat to the disbelievers. Then He speaks of resurrection by showing His omnipotence over them and how the whole universe is subjected to Him. He also exposes the polytheists’ fables in believing that their idols possess power when they can do neither harm nor good, and in believing that the female is inferior to the male.
    Allah then refers to the previous messengers and mentions some of the lessons to be learned: how He created and formed things of use to man; how He gave different amounts of provisions to the rich and the poor; how He blessed man in creating males and females and their procreating children through marriage. Allah gives parables of His omnipotence and greatness. He then shows the rules of Islam pertaining to justice, the maintenance of family relations, and the fulfillment of promises. 
    And again He shows the inimitability of the Qur’an and the polytheists’ disbelief in it and their false allegations against it. He points out the status of the polytheists on the Day of Resurrection, and how in life they judge things as lawful or prohibited without any evidence. He also says that the Jews who are close to polytheists will be punished in the same way. He bids the believers to be steadfast and patient, righteous and benevolent.
 
    1. Allah’s Command is coming to pass (and so you disbelievers need not reproach the Messenger for divine visitation in a sarcastic way). So do not cut off your last hope of forgiveness by wishing (scornfully) that it be hastened on. Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes; He is infinitely far beyond those whom they associate with Him.
    2. He sends down the angels with the Spirit of His Command on whom He chooses of His worshipers as He wills, warning people of the danger of polytheism and to relate to them thus: “There in no god but Me, so entertain the profound piety due to Me.”
    3. He has created the heavens and the earth in accordance with truth and for just ends. He is infinitely Exalted far beyond those they associate with Him.
    4. He created man from a sperm-drop emitted, yet man is an evident adversary, more ready to argue than to obey. 
    5. And He created the cattle, camels, sheep, and goats (al-an`am) for you to advantage yourselves for warmth. And you make use of them for other purposes, and they are raised to serve as food.
    6. And they afford you keen pleasure to the sense of sight when you drive them home (with filled stomachs) and when you lead them to pasture to graze.
    7. And they carry your burdens to a land you could not have reached but with arduous toil. Your Lord is indeed Compassionate and Most-Merciful.
    8. He also created horses, mules, and asses for you to ride and to use as an adornment, and He creates what is yet unknown to you.
    9. It is Allah Who indicates to you the way to tread, the path of truth, with some ways deviating from righteousness. And had He willed, He would have guided you all to the one path leading directly to Him.
    10. It is He Who sends down the rainwater from heaven, suitable to drink and instrumental in springing up vegetation for your cattle, camels, sheep, and goats to graze and to supply you with milk, meat, and wool.
    11. And therewith He causes vegetal growth of grain, olives, palm trees, grapes, and of all kinds of fruits. Indeed, all this is emblematic of omnipotence—food for thought taken by those who meditate.
    12. And He subjected for you the night and the day, the sun and the moon to a state of subservience, and He ordered the stars and the planets in subservience to your advantage and your end—signs of omnipotence and authority making a deep impression on those who consider.
    13. Next comes all that He distributed to your necessity and advantage of objects of various glorious colors within and without the surface of the earth. This is, indeed, a great sign to those who remember Allah and lift to Him their inward sight.
    14. It is He Who made the sea subservient to you to use as a source of aliment and ornaments. You eat of its fresh and tender flesh and wear its coral and pearls. And you see the ships parting its surface and plowing its billowy waves. They help you accomplish your object of seeking after His bounty to the end that you may be thankful.
    15. And He cast in the earth with firm mountains placed in a certain setting, fixed as with an anchor to stabilize it lest it should reel with you from side to side or in all directions. And He furnished it with rivers and roadways to use as a guide in your travels from one place to another.
    16. And He created other visible waymarks together with the stars serving as guideposts to guide people on land and at sea.
    17. Therefore, would He Who creates and brings things into existence out of nothingness be likened to him who simply can never create any entity? Can you people not consider this?
    18. And if you were to count the favors of Allah, you would find them uncountable, innumerable. Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful. 
    19. And Allah is All-Knowing of all that you converse secretly, and He knows what you utter aloud.
    20. And those whom they invoke besides Allah are incapable of creating any entity. On the contrary, they themselves have been created.
    21. Inanimate dead idols and lifeless objects insensible to feeling and knowing, unaffected by anything specified. They do not perceive resurrection nor when their devotees will be resurrected. (Therefore, it is not proper for you to associate them with Allah in worship.)
    22. In fact, things all around point clearly to you people that your God is absolutely One Eternal God. Those who deny Hereafter simply close their hearts and demonstrate pride that get the better of their prudence.
    23. Allah is, indeed, fully knows all that they converse secretly or openly declare and of all that is being said. He does not love the arrogant who exercise inordinate pride.
    24. And when they are asked if they know what Allah has sent down, they dismiss it (contemptuously) with the remark “myths of old.”  
    25. Such is the disposition of those who will bear their burdensome lot at Judgment and the burden of their wrongs in full, in addition to the wrongs of those unknowing people whom they misled into error. Evil, indeed, is the fate of those who are burdened with wrongs, and evil, indeed, are the wrongs they bear!
    26. Potent was the scheming of their predecessors that it deserved Allah’s punishment. He struck them at the bases of their foundation, their roofs collapsed over their heads, and they were unexpectedly tormented unaware.
    27. And at Judgment they will be put to disgrace and be asked the whereabouts of those associates whom they once presumed to be divine and in whose favor they contended with opposing arguments against Allah’s omnipotence and authority. There and then those with knowledge will say, “This is the Day when disgrace and torment are laid upon those disbelievers.”
    28. They are those who persist in doing wrong and continue firmly in the state of disbelief in Allah until the encounter with the angels of death. There and then they express their submissiveness to Allah and learn at last acceptance of their lot and claim they never did wrong. But the angels say to them, “But you did, and Allah is indeed All-Knowing of all you did.”
    29. “And now,” they add, “enter through the gates of Hell, wherein you will pass to eternal suffering. Odious, indeed, is the abode of the proud arrogant.”
    30. So would those who believed in Allah be asked if they knew what Allah has sent down. “All that is truthful and charitable,” they say, “and all that was imparted to us of knowledge, wisdom, and light.” These and such persons whose deeds were imprinted with wisdom and piety in life below will reap the fruits of their piety. Allah bestows on them His efficacious grace here, and His efficacious grace is far better for them hereafter; and how excellent and supreme is the heavenly residence of the pious!
    31. It is the Gardens of Eden wherein they enter and experience the pleasure afforded by the rivers running directly beneath. Therein they will have whatever they desire to give them pleasure for thus does Allah reward those who are pious to Him as He deserves.
    32. They are the good ones whose lives the angels take up. The angels greet them with the expressions of good will: “Peace be upon you. Enter into Paradise, which is the reward commensurate with your deeds.”
    33. Do the disbelievers wait until some fitting event presents itself and they distinctly perceive the angels or experience the execution of Allah’s decree of punishment? Thus much did their predecessors behave, and We did not do them injustice, but it was they who unjustly wronged themselves.
    34. By consequence, the evil deeds they committed afflict them, and they were beset on all sides by the same things they had mocked.
    35. And to excuse their disbelief, the polytheists insolently say, “Had Allah willed, neither our fathers nor we would have worshiped other gods besides Him, nor would we have invented prohibitions other than those decreed by Him.” Thus badly acted their predecessors. But is the Messenger really responsible for any act or duty other than proclaiming the divine message and elucidating its text?
    36. And to every nation We sent a messenger to say to them, “Worship Allah alone and avoid at any cost worshiping anything else—human or idol.” And so, among the people there were those whom Allah had guided to His path of righteousness and others who were justifiably led into error. See how was the end of the beliers.
    37. In fact, if you, Prophet, are anxious for their guidance to Allah’s path of righteousness, you had better realize that Allah does not guide those who thrive on disobedience and draw His wrath on themselves, nor will they find those who vindicate them.
    38. And the polytheists swear by Allah that Allah will never resurrect anyone once he is dead. But indeed He will. This is a divine promise, and the promise of Allah is the truth, but most people do not know this.
    39. It is an act of mercy to both the guilty and the innocent that Allah resurrects the dead and restores them to life to make evident to them the points upon which the whole unreasoning turned and the points that were once in the heat of difference so that the disbelievers who denied Him and His laws realize how unjust they were liars.
    40. Indeed, all it takes when We will to bring anything into existence is simply to say to it “Be” and it is.
    41. And those who migrated because of persecution and moved to where they could best serve Allah’s cause will be the recipients of His mercy and blessings. We will confer on them Our prevenient and efficacious location here; the efficacious grace promised hereafter is, indeed, far greater if only they knew.
    42. These are the votaries who had patience, purposed to fulfill their obligation to Allah, and in Him they put their trust.
    43. And never did We send messengers before you, Prophet, but they were men (not angels) to whom We revealed Our message. Therefore, you disbelievers may ask those who are well versed in the earlier Scriptures (Jews and Christians) if, indeed, you do not know.
    44. We sent to them clear revelations and signs, as well as the Zubur (the Book revealed to Dawud [David]; the Psalms), which guide out of darkness and superstitions of later times. And We sent down to you, Prophet, the Qur’an to explain to the people all that has been sent to them of decrees, ordinances, and the fundamental principles of Allah’s system of faith and worship so that they may meditate.
    45. And now does the disbelievers' scheming bad deeds make them feel secure against Allah’s wrath, while this may cause the earth to sink under their feet, or they may unexpectedly be seized with torment from where they never expected or perceived.
    46. Or are they certain that He will not seize them with punishment in the midst of their doings and that they will not be defiant?
    47. Or that He will not punish them by constant sense of danger and cause their gradual fall from power. At some point they may wake up for Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    48. Did the disbelievers not see into Allah’s cosmic sign of the shadow, and how everything that He has created casts its shadow upon a surface by intercepting the direct rays of the sun and other luminaries, and how objects turn their shadows right and left according to the relative position of the source of light, and how such shadows are governed by cosmic laws in comely and lowly prostration to Allah.
    49. And to Allah all created beings in the heavens and all moving creatures on earth prostrate themselves in reverence and adoration, and so do the angels, who do not display pride.
    50. They entertain the profound reverence and fear due to Him and keep in awe of Him Who is far above them and beyond all, and they discharge their duties in obedience to His command*.
    51. And Allah has made evident His oneness and uniqueness. He repeatedly said, “Do not worship two gods; He is One and Only; therefore, fear Me and keep in awe of Me alone.”
    52. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and religion is a duty and an obligation lasting and incumbent on all. Therefore, will you all hold in piety a god other than Allah?
    53. Do you people not realize that all favor abounding in you is the grace of Allah? And when you are befallen with an adversity, it is to Him that you instinctively implore, pray, and beseech for help.
    54. Yet when He delivers you from the adversity a group of you associate other deities with their Lord.
    55. [That is] a way of showing ingratitude and the indisposition to acknowledge the benefits received. But you just keep lusting after your sinful system of faith and worship, and before long you will come to know the consequence of denying the truth.
----------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    
    
    56. They dedicate to their idols, designating them ignorantly as gods, a part of what We apportioned to them of Our bounty (cattle and crops) when neither themselves nor their belongings or possessions are really their own, but Allah’s own. By Allah, you disbelievers will have much to answer for and will be heavily punished for your fabrication.
    57. They presume upon Allah; they regard the angels as females and ascribe them to Him as His daughters. Extolled be He! Yet they ascribe to themselves the males, the sex they approve and favorably accept.
    58. When any of them hears the news of the birth of his own female child, his countenance at once speaks dark dejection, and he falls into the darkness of repressed dismay.
    59. He hides from people or keeps out of sight because of the news, which allegedly defames him and harms his repute. He does not know whether to keep his child alive and be both defamed and despised, or to bury her in the dust. Evil indeed is the resolution uniting their judgment.
    60. Their image would always be an exact similitude of evil, and Allah, like unto Him, there is none. And He is The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.
    61. And if Allah were to punish the people for their unjust doings the minute they commit themselves to such a line of conduct, He would not allow one single living creature to remain on earth. But He defers them to a predetermined point of time so that, it is hoped, they may repent. And when their time comes, they will never be able to delay it or anticipate it for one hour.
    62. And they ascribe to Allah the female sex that they themselves hate, and their tongues speak falsehood far in excess. They presume upon Allah that all that is fair and pleasing will fall to their lot. It is no question that they will be rushed to the Fire.
    63. Rest assured, Prophet, by Allah, that We sent messengers before you to nations who preceded in order of time. (They presented them with the truth guiding to all truth.) But Satan allured them to brighter worlds as a result of their doings, and he led the way then and he leads it now amid the encircling gloom wherein he is their patron, but they will suffer painful torment.
    64. And We have sent down the Book (the Qur’an) to you, Muhammad, only to serve Allah’s purpose and be of service in effecting Allah’s object of making evident to the various sects and to the people at large the points in the heat of differences. It is the truth that guides to all truth, as well as a mercy to those who believe in Allah and the Books He sent.
    65. And it is Allah Who sends down rainwater from the heaven wherewith He revives the earth after it has suffered death. This is, indeed, a sign for a people who hear.
    66. And you certainly have a lesson in cattle (serving as an incitement and exhortation to you people). We supply you with a drink from their bellies, a drink produced in the udders by conjoint action between chyle (the product of chyme or digested food in the intestines) and blood, which carries to the udders all necessary aliment and elements, and there flows wholesome milk, pure white and palatable to those who drink it.
    67. And out of the products of the date palm and the vine you extract sweet juices and other wholesome provision, another sign (among the marvels of Allah), esteemed highly by those who consider.
    68. And Allah has revealed to the bees with the instinct of building their homes or hives in the mountains, on the trees, and in the trellis (constructed for the climbing vines amid people’s habitations),
    69.  And to collect their food from the nectar produced by the blossoms of the various kinds of fruits and to travel the paths to which Allah has guided them. There issues from their bellies a nutritious, juicy drink of varying colors, affording cure to mankind. Indeed, this is an outward and visible sign of grace appreciated by people who meditate.
    70. And Allah is He Who brought you people into being (and caused you to exist). Then He takes you up, and among you is he who is carried through to decrepit age that he loses the wits once about him, and he loses remembrance of the knowledge he had formerly mastered, surely Allah is Ever-Knowing, Ever-Determiner.
    71. And it is Allah Who graced some of you with more livelihood than others and made His grace abound more in some than in others. And those who are graced will not go shares with what has fallen to their lot with those whom they have on hand (captives and slaves) so that they be as the master although they are humans like themselves. How then do they make Allah go shares with His servants? Is this not simply a repudiation of His favor that abounds in them?
    72. And it is Allah Who provided you with wives and from them did He bless you with sons and grandsons. And He provisioned you with the wholesome sustenance of food and drink. Is it then that the disbelievers assert falsehood and will not esteem Allah’s efficacious favor abounding in them? 
    73. Yet they worship besides Allah objects with no power to provision them anything from the heavens or from the earth, nor can they possibly do that.
    74. And you disbelievers must not strike similitudes for Allah, and like unto Him there is none (therefore, do not make any comparisons between Him and created beings), for Allah knows and you do not.
    75. Allah cites an instance of two men. One is a slave, the property of his master, who is divested of freedom and personal rights; the other is the master in whom Our fair provision abounds; he is free to spend in services secretly and publicly. Can they achieve something equal or possess a like degree in any aspect of life? Never! (Therefore, how can Allah the Creator of all be equaled with any being?) Praise be to Him, (and extolled are His glorious attributes) but most of them do not know.
    76. Again Allah strikes a similitude of two other men to illustrate a general truth: one of them is dumb, unable to accomplish anything, totally dependent on his patron for his livelihood. Wherever his master sends him to perform a job, he utterly fails to accomplish the desired end. Is he equal to him who is whole and just and who keeps on the path of righteousness? 
    77. And it is Allah alone Who is All-Knowing of all the Unseen, the unknown, and the mysteries in the heavens and the earth, which are beyond human knowledge or comprehension. The bringing about of the eventful, predetermined Hour takes as much time as the twinkling of an eye or even less. Allah is All-Determiner, indeed, over all things
    78. And it is Allah Who brought you from your mothers’ wombs to the external world unconscious of your surroundings, (devoid of intellectual acquaintance or with perception of your environment) and empty of all knowledge. He provided you with the faculties of hearing and seeing, faculties divine, and He implanted in you the heart-sight that you may, it is hoped, be thankful.
    79. Do the disbelievers not apply their sight to the birds moving through mid-air in the firmament of heaven? No one keeps them in the air but Allah Who designed their construction and made it fit for its purpose. Is this not, indeed, emblematic of omnipotence, to which bow the people who believe?
    80. And it is Allah Who made of your homes a dwelling of calm and peace; of the skins of animals He provided you with portable homes (tents) easy to carry in your travels from place to place and to pitch them where you choose to rest. And from the animals’ wool, fur, and hair He furnished you with movable articles, goods, and chattels to enjoy up to a predetermined point of time.
    81. And it is Allah Who made the trees and other objects He created cast shades (when they intercept light), to protect you from the scorching heat of the sun. And He hollowed out for you caves in the hills and the mountains to shelter you, and He equipped you with garments to protect you from the heat and other garments (armor) to shield you from the weapons when you combat in warfare. Thus does Allah mean to make all favor abound in you that you may, it is hoped, conform to Islam.
    82. O Prophet, if they should yet turn a deaf ear, you incur no blame, for you are responsible only for delivering the evident proclamation (and elucidating its text).
    83. These disbelievers fully know Allah’s favor abounding in them, but their wrongful actions and their impious deeds bespeak clearly of the denial of Allah’s favors. And those of them who disbelieve in Allah’s goodwill constitute the majority.
    84. The day will come when We raise again a witness from every nation (the messenger sent to them) to testify of his peoples’ response. There and then those who dibelieved in Allah will never be permitted to plea in justification of their deeds of inequity. And if they invoke His forgiveness, they will not be allowed to amend.
    85. And on the Day the unjust are confronted with the torment, it will never be lightened nor be put in respite.
    86. And when those who associated other deities with Allah see their partners, they will say, “O Allah, these are our partners whom we invoked besides You.” But the partners will cast back the charge and say to them, “You are indeed liars. (You did not worship us, but you worshiped your whims, and we are no partners to you.)”
    87. There and then the disbelievers will offer submission to the will of Allah and whatever they used to fabricate will err away from them.
    88. Those who disbelieved in Allah and stood in the way to prevent His truth from guiding people to all truth from Allah will have much to answer for. We will increase their torment above torment. They will be requited for the denial of Allah and for obstructing divine truth and corruption.
    89. The day will come when We raise again a witness from every nation—the messenger who evolved from their midst and conveyed Our message—to testify to his peoples’ response, and We summon you, O Prophet, to testify of your peoples’ response. The Qur’an that We sent down to you is the fountainhead of divine knowledge and the chief source of divine information. It is a guide to all truth, a mercy extended to the people, and joyful tidings to Muslims.
    90. Allah commands justice, deeds of wisdom and piety, and benevolence to those of your kindred who are in need. And He forbids all that is wrongful and obscene, all that is maleficent and excites disgust and unwarranted iniquity course of action. He exhorts you to what is good and laudable, that you may, it is hoped, consider.
    91. And fulfill the solemn covenant if you make one, and keep the vow and do not break the oaths after being ratified and after you have made solemn appeal to Allah in Sponsor thereof. Allah knows all that you perform.
    92. Do not be like the unstable workwoman who unravels the strands of her woven fabric after she has manufactured it (in a loom). What a tangled web you weave when you deceive. You use your oaths fraudulently among yourselves; you break and dishonor your vows with the weak when you find them more advantageous with the strong and more numerous. Allah tries your prudence and on the Day of Judgment He will clear up matters with which you were at difference.
    93. Had Allah willed, He would have made all of you one nation united in feeling and thought, but He deafens the heart of whom He pleases and guides whom He wills. Rest assured that you will be questioned for all that you did in this life on the Day of Judgment (and will be rewarded accordingly).
    94. And do not fraudulently use your oaths among yourselves to practice deception lest one’s foot should slide and lose its hold after it has been holding in a stable position and you suffer the evil consequence of precluding Allah’s way from guiding to all truth and you suffer a tremendous torment.
    95. And do not dishonor My covenant or exchange it for the vanity of the fleeting and ephemeral price. What Allah has in store for those who honor their vows is indeed in superlatives if only you knew.
    96. What you people may have of advantages will be depleted; whereas, what Allah has is eternal and everlasting. And We will richly recompense those who possessed patience that was purposed to fulfill their obligation to Allah. Their reward will be assessed according to the best of their deeds.
    97. Anyone—male or female—whose deeds are imprinted with wisdom and piety and will be made to enjoy a good and happy life that is worth living. And We will recompense them in the hereafter according to the best of their worldly deeds.
    98. And when you recite the Qur’an begin with the opening formula of seeking Allah’s refuge against the outcast Satan.”
    99. He has no authority on those who believe and who trust in Allah and draw help from Him.
    100. But he exerts authority upon those who take him as a patron and associate other deities with Allah.
    101. If We happen to exchange a verse for another verse—and Allah knows exactly what to reveal and when—the disbelievers accuse you, Muhammad, of fabrication. Indeed, most of them do not know.
    102. Say to them, “All divine revelations are being conveyed by the Holy Spirit from your Lord with the truth to strengthen those whose hearts have believed, and they are a guidance and glad tidings to the Muslims.”
    103. And We do know what they say: “He (Muhammad) is being taught by a man who dictates to him the words he expresses to the people.” But the man they refer to is foreign while the Qur’an is being revealed in an evident Arabic language.
    104. Indeed, those who do not believe in Allah’s revelations (signs) will not be blessed with Allah’s guidance to His path of righteousness and must expect the torment that will be laid upon them.
    105. Those who dare to intentionally fabricate falsehood are but those who do not believe in Allah’s revelations, and it is they who are the liars.
    106. He who disbelieves in Allah after having believed in Allah’s will, will suffer for it unless he was forced to do so by persecution but deep down he preserves a heart happily maintaining belief. But he who cunningly and deceptively rejects the idea of faith will draw Allah’s anger upon himself, and these are they who will pass to eternal torment.
    107. This is on account of their love for life here before that in the hereafter, besides the fact that Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness those who are disbelievers.
    108. These are they whose hearts Allah has set a seal of dullness of comprehension and whose faculties of hearing and sight lack perception, and these are the heedless.
    109. It is no question that in the hereafter they will be the losers.
    110. Nevertheless, Allah accepts true repentance and the atonement made by people. Therefore, those who immigrated to where they could best serve Allah after they had suffered temptation and persecution, and who strove in Allah’s cause and endured the hardships with patience and perseverance, will find Allah indeed Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    111. The Day will come when each self disputing on behalf of itself and is requited with what is commensurate with its deeds, and never will they be done injustice.
    112. Allah represents the fate of those who rebelled against His law by means of a similitude of the town in which His grace abounded in security and in opulent supplies of provisions from every direction. But instead of living contentedly with ever thankful hearts, its people were disbelieving and ungrateful to Allah and disobedient to His laws. Consequently, He afflicted the town with humiliation and hunger and fear devolving upon it in requital of what its peoples were doing.
    113. A messenger from among them was sent to them (with the spirit of truth guiding to all truth), but they denied Our message and accused him of falsehood. In consequence, they were unjust and were made to suffer torment.
    114. Therefore, you Muslims, eat of what Allah provisioned you lawful and good; it is replete with choice of all delight. And be thankful to Allah for His grace, if it is He Whom you worship.
    115. He only forbids you to eat the flesh of a dead beast, blood, the flesh of swine, and the acclaimed flesh of a beast slaughtered under the invocation of a name other than that of Allah. But if one disobeys under compelling circumstances and not through willful disobedience and transgression, Allah will admit of excuse that no sin is incurred. Allah is, indeed, Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful. 
    116. Do not speak falsehood at the grossness of which common sense revolts. You create prohibitions for yourselves and designate this as lawful and that as forbidden, wherefore you assert what is false and ascribe it to Allah. Those who fabricate falsehood to Allah or wittingly endeavor by falsification of words to make things seem divine that are not, will not prosper.
    117. They derive pleasure and enjoyment from their falsehood, but the pleasure it affords them is of a short duration. Then comes the encounter with the painful torment.
    118. As for the Jews, We prohibited for them—for their iniquities—the things We have already mentioned to you earlier, O Prophet. We were never unjust to them, but it was they who always did injustice to themselves. 
    119. Nevertheless, Allah always extends mercy and forgiveness to those who wrong themselves in ignorance and repent thereafter, imprinting their deed with wisdom and piety. Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    120. Ibrahim (Abraham) was, indeed, a perfect leader of excellence: submissive to the will of Allah and a devout unswerving Muslim. He never associated other deities with Allah.
    121. He was always thankful for the favors of Allah abounding in him. Allah selected him and guided him to His path of righteousness.
    122. And We bestowed upon him Our prevenient and efficacious reward here, and he will be among the righteous in the hereafter.
    123. And We revealed to you, O Prophet, what We ordained: that you follow the system of faith and worship followed by Ibrahim, the unswerving Muslim who never associated other deities with Allah. 
    124. The Sabbath was imposed on those who were hardhearted and always differed about it and argued against its validity and its timing (the Jews on Saturday and the Christians on Sunday. And many among them defiantly and shamefully broke it). And they will always contend with opposing arguments until Allah will judge between them about their dispute on the Day of Judgment.
    125. O Prophet, call people graciously to the path of (Allah) your Lord, the path of righteousness, with wise, graceful, and appropriate admonition, meeting them on their own ground and propitiating them, each in his own capacity. Reason with them in a gracious manner. Allah (your lord) knows best those who have erred away from His way of righteousness, and He knows best those who steer a straight course and whose guide is Providence.
    126. And if you should inflict punishment, exact retribution, or make reprisals for injury, harm, or wrong, then you may avenge your right with a similar injury and to the same extent. But if you bear the wrong and endure patiently (as an obligation to Allah and not as a reflection of human weakness) you will derive great benefits, and advantage yourselves of Allah’s charity.
    127. And have patience, Prophet. Show forbearance under their provocation, and bear with them their faults and limitations. For in patience you apply yourself unto Allah. And do not be grieved at heart for their denial of the divine message (and for their hearts that dare rise defiant against Allah). Nor should you be sorely distressed on account of their scheming.
    128. Rest assured that Allah upholds those who entertain the profound piety due to Him, and turn their thoughts on moral excellence and fair benevolence.


