SURAH 17
AL- ISRA
The Night Journey
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah starts by glorifying Allah. Then it mentions the Night Journey and the mission of Musa (Moses) and how the Children of Isra’il received it. The surah refers to the status of the Qur’an as a guide to the truth, to the cosmic signs of day and night, and to how people will be judged on the Day of Resurrection according to what they did in this life. Allah shows the reasons behind the corruption of nations, the position of people as regards their endeavors, and the results of their deeds in the hereafter. The following verses ordain holding one’s parents in esteem, show the attitude of people toward their riches, and give ten commandments to build a righteous society. The surah then refutes the false claims of the polytheists as regards angels and shows that such claims are baseless.
    Allah then speaks of the glorification He deserves and of the polytheists’ denial. Allah gives commandments to the believers and shows His treatment with disbelievers in this world and in the hereafter. Then Allah speaks of the creation of man and Satan. Again Allah warns the polytheists. He then deals with human dignity and reminds of the torment on the Day of Resurrection. Then He mentions the attempts of the polytheists to make the Prophet abandon his mission and how Allah provided him with the ability to overcome these attempts. Then Allah gives several guiding commandments to the Prophet as well as supplications with which to invoke Allah. 
    The surah then again refers to the status of the Qur’an, and it deals with the spirit (ruh) and its secrets. Allah mentions the inimitable nature of the Qur’an and the inability of jinn and humans to produce anything similar to it. He shows the attitude of people toward the Qur’an and His ability to bring about other verses. Finally, Allah shows that the Qur’an includes the truth. He shows the position of the true believers and that they should always thank Allah and praise Him.
   
    1. Glory be to Allah and extolled are His glorious attributes attendant upon His manifestation of conducting His servant by night from the Inviolable Mosque (in Makkah) to the farthest mosque (Al-Aqsa in Jerusalem), whose precincts We had blessed. It was a journey that was planned without the factors of time or space to show him some of Our signs evincing both Our omnipotence and all-hearing. Allah is indeed All-Hearing (with unlimited audition) and All-Seeing (Who clearly sees all things).
    2. It was within these precincts, which constituted the heart of the sacred environs. And We sent to them Musa (Moses), to whom We gave the Book (the Tawrah), which We made a guidance to the Children of Isra’il. And We enjoined them thus: “Take no trustee other than Me.”
    3. They were the offspring of those whom We carried in the ark with Nuh (Noah), who was a thankful worshiper in whose heart reigned piety and gratitude.
    4. We decreed for the Children of Isra’il in the Book, thus: “You will occasion two events of self-induced corruption; twice your arrogance will stir you up to exaltation and be your greatest incitement of evil, to the end that you will go to mischief and create discord.”
    5. When in due time the first occasion came to pass, We humbled your arrogance by wedding you to a calamity. We sent against you servants of Ours invested with merciless violence and martial daring, who ravaged deep in the land and made their way right through your residences. And there the promise was fulfilled.
    6. When the conquerors abounded in self-conceit and you humbled yourselves to Allah, We gave you back mastery over them and We made you abound more in manpower.
    7. There you can see that if you do fair deeds, you advantage yourselves of good behavior. But if you should bode ill, misbehave, or commit odious deeds, you will have harmed your own selves. Then, when in due time the second occasion came to pass, you were overpowered and vanquished so that your countenances are disgraced, and the enemies broke into the Mosque as they did once before and annihilated all that they acquired.
    8. May Allah have mercy on you! But should you resume your iniquities, We will, in turn, resume Our punishment. We have made Hell the dungeon’s grim confines for the disbelievers.
    9. This Qur’an does indeed guide to the best way of moral rightness (which has had everlasting residence in the character of the Godhead and to the uprightness of decision). It announces joyful tidings to the believers (who acknowledge Allah with believing hearts and do righteous deeds): they will be recipients of a great reward.
    10. And it announces an ominous destiny to those who do not believe in the Hereafter: that they must expect the painful torment laid upon the damned.
    11. Man moves quickly and sometimes unjustly to invoke evil upon people, just as he moves quickly to invoke a blessing upon them, for man has a natural propensity in him to be unduly hasty.
    12. We made the night and the day two outward, visible signs. We effaced the light from the entity of the night. We made the day a visible entity for objects to be perceptible by the sense of sight in order to betake yourselves to Providence, for His bounty, and in order to know the number of the years. This is also to reckon the time occupied by the sun in its apparent passage through the zodiac and the period of the earth’s revolution round the sun, which form a natural unit of time so that you can compute time and determine it by reckoning. And everything did We expound and make plain and abounding in detail.
    13. We encircled the neck of every human being with a bird of omen (as it were) auguring good or ill, and on the Day of Judgment We will present each with a book spread open bearing his precise record laid open to view.
    14. There and then each will be told, “Read your own book and enough is your secret self today to be your constant reckoner.”
    15. Indeed, he who is steered by the spirit of truth benefits his own self, and he who errs and strays from the path of truth and righteousness will harm his own self. No self, bearing wrongs or not, will in any way bear the wrong of another, nor would We inflict a torment on a people until We had sent to them a messenger (serving as a warning and they turned a deaf ear).
    16. And when We justly decide on perishing a town for its iniquity, We incite those of its luxuriant people to indulge in the style of shameless immorality, and there comes the true Word that was predicted beforehand (that they are to be losers) and We destroy it.
    17. How many generations have We caused to perish after Nuh (Noah), and enough is Allah as Ever-Cognizant, Ever-Beholding of the guilty deeds of His servants (and He will punish them in return).
    18. He who is willing to go by the world and its fleeting, evanescent, and ephemeral enjoyment will find Allah to respond to whom He wills and to apportion to him what He wills. But in the end We will make Hell his abode to roast, reprobated, despised, and rejected.
    19. But he who chooses the hereafter and has purposed and directs his efforts to fulfilling the requirements incidental to this end with a believing heart—he and such persons will find that their endeavor is esteemed and highly appreciated.
    20. Those and these are given what is apportioned to them. We bestow on both of them of our bounty, and never was the bounty of Allah restricted to any limits.
    21. See how We have graced some in status, rank, or fortune above others! And We have made the hereafter excel the world below and be the world of grace.
    22. Do not set up with Allah another god or associate other deities with Him lest you should be reprobated and left humiliated and abandoned.
    23. Allah your Creator has ordained that you worship no one but Him and you adore Him with appropriate acts and rites and that you commit your parents to your fairest care. When one or both of them attain old age (they expect your friendly disposition by your conduct to them). Therefore, do not offend them by saying "Fie" or by giving vent to an exclamation of impatience or disgust, nor should you scold or reprimand them, and let your speech with them be sweet.
    24. And lower to them the wing of power in humility, standing manifest of kindness and mercy, and invoke Allah to be merciful to them thus: “O Allah, I pray and beseech You to extend to them Your mercy in return for their bringing me up in my childhood.”
    25. (Allah) your Lord knows best your thoughts and feelings and all that is stored in your innermost being. If you are righteous, He is, indeed, Ever-Forgiving to those who humbly resort to Him repenting.
    26. And render to the poor being of kin his rightful due and also to the indigent and to the wayfarer who does not have the means for transportation; but do not squander wastefully.
    27. Indeed, the squanderers given to excessive expenditure are the twins of the satanic, and Satan has been rebellious, disobedient, and ever-disbelieving to Allah his Lord.
    28. But if you keep away from those of them who are needy, in expectation of Allah’s mercy to help you be helpful to them, then let your speech with them, until then, be reasonable and sweet.
    29. And do not shackle your hand to your neck, as it were, unwilling to spend anything. Nor should you spread it wide open, lest you sit blameworthy brooding in the vast abyss of reprimand and woeful want.
    30. Indeed, (Allah) your Lord gives provision generously and confers support gratuitously to whom He wills, and He also gives by measure to whom He wills. He has always been All-Cognizant and All-Seeing, Whose constant vigilance is extended to all His creatures.
    31. Do not kill your children for fear of want. We provide for them and for you. Indeed, killing them has been a flagrant violation of Allah’s system of faith and worship and a major sin.
    32. Nor should you even come close to committing adultery. It is a forbidden sexual union regarded by Allah as an immoral act, a degrading vice, and an obscenity.
    33. Nor should you kill a self that Allah has made inviolable unless it be justified for a proven crime. And if someone has been killed unjustly, then his patron is authorized by Allah to use the means of procuring redress of grievances through avenging his right. But should he choose to avenge his right, he must not carry it to excess, for the divine law is on his side.
    34. Nor should you come near the property of the orphan, unless it be with the motive of improving, advancing, or raising it to be a better quality or condition, until he reaches maturity and is able to take charge of it. Fulfill the solemn covenant if you should make one, and keep the vow, and meet your engagements and obligations. A covenant is a great responsibility, and those who break it will be questioned for it on the Day of Judgment.
    35. Dispense the quantity ascertained by measuring to the full when you sell. And when using the method of weighing, then you are enjoined to use a precise balance conforming to a standard and an exemplar of equity. This is more charitable ensuring safety and leading to the determined purpose.
    36. And do not pursue a subject of which you have no knowledge (nor charge anyone with a fault or a crime when you are not sure of his guilt). Indeed, you are held responsible for the faculties of hearing, seeing, and intellect on the Day of Judgment.
    37. Nor should you walk on earth displaying arrogance, for even if the incessant tread of your feet pierce the rough stones, you will not be able to rend the earth, nor will you be able to reach a level like a mountain in height.
    38. Of all such attributes, those that have a name of evil savor stand in your Lord's (Allah’s) sight deserving of hatred.
    39. These are maxims of wisdom Allah has revealed to you. He has issued a mandate commanding that you people not associate with Him another god or deity lest you should be cast into Hell, where you are balmeworthy in the vast abyss of reprimand and rejection.
    40. Do you disbelievers really believe that your Lord (Allah) has elected for you sons and ascribed to Himself daughters from among the angels? In effect what you put in words to describe your thoughts of Him is indeed monstrous (slanderous, blasphemous, and of grave consequence).
    41. We have expounded and oriented Our revelations in this Qur’an to circumstances and requirements so as to remind the disbelievers; yet they do what is contrary to that normally expected. It increases their repulsion.
    42. Say to them, “If indeed He had, as they say, associate deities who share His divine nature, His omnipotence, and His authority, then they would have certainly sought out a way to the Owner of the Throne.”
    43. Praise be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely far above the impiety they utter against Him.
    44. The seven heavens and the earth and all animate and inanimate beings therein praise His glory and extol His glorious attributes. There is not one single creature but extol His praise and His omnipotence and exclusive authority, but you disbelievers do not comprehend their way of extolling His glory. Indeed, He has always been Ever-Forbearing and Oft-Forgiving.
    45. When you, Prophet, recite the Qur’an, We interpose an invisible screen between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter to keep you out of their sight.
    46. We enshrouded their hearts with lids to preclude them from exercising intellectual power or understanding and struck them deaf so that nothing that engages the intellect would come to their hearing. These are the people whose hearts dare rise defiant against Allah. When you recite the Qur’an and Allah is mentioned as the sole owner of omnipotence and exclusive authority, they insolently turn their backs upon you with a repulsion and repugnance.
    47. We do know the reason why they lend you their ears when they listen to you, Muhammad; they are reticent about their intention disclosed only in their secret conferences. To keep their nobility and authority in the status quo, the unjust wrongdoers publicly say, “You people only follow a man who has witchcraft.”
    48. See how they describe you, Prophet, in irrelevant similes reflecting deviation so that they are unable to find the path of truth.
    49. They say in wonderment, “Do you mean that after we have been reduced to bones and fragments we will be restored to life and be created anew?”
    50. Say to them, “So be it, even if you were converted into stones or iron
    51. “Or any other material and you know it is beyond animation.” There and then they will say, “Who will then restore us to life?” Say to them, “He who originally brought you into being and caused you to exist in the first creation.” There, they will wag their heads in doubt and ask, “When?” Say to them, “It may well be quite near.
    52. “This will be the Day when He summons you all from the graves, and you respond praising Allah and His glory, and you surmise that you have not lingered except a little while.”
    53. O Prophet, tell My servants who declare or state in words a specified fact, thought, opinion, or intention to say what is friendly, favorable, and laudatory, for Satan is on the alert for an occasion to incite mankind and set them at variance and to stir up enmity among them. Indeed, Satan has always been an evident enemy to man.
    54. Allah knows best your disposition. He has mercy on you if He wills, or if He wills, He inflicts you with torment. And We did not send you to the people to be their trustee (but to be a bearer of joyful tidings to believers and a warning to disbelievers).
    55. Allah your Lord knows best all creatures in the heavens and on earth, and We graced some prophets with more privileges than others, and We gave David the Zabur (Psalms). (It is no wonder that We gave you the great grace of the Qur’an).
    56. Say to the disbelievers who associate other deities with Allah, “Invoke those objects of worship who you suppose share with Allah His divine nature (and you will realize that they will utterly fail to respond). They have neither the power to relieve you from adversity or transfer it away.”
    57. Those to whom they make a devout supplication—saints, jinn, or angels—are themselves devout servants of Allah striving [to see] which of them will be the nearest to Allah and the more efficient in serving His purpose. They hope His mercy, and they fear His torment. Indeed, the torment Allah inflicts on the offender makes one heedful. 
    58. There is not one single town but will suffer destruction before the Day of Judgment or We make them suffer severe torment, an ordinance that has been decreed and inscribed in the (Archetypal) Book.
    59. In fact, nothing prevented Us from sending you, Muhammad, to the people with the power of working miracles to evince both your mission and Allah’s omnipotence and rightful authority except that people of bygone times refused to acknowledge them. Among them were the Thamud, to whom We sent the she-camel as an evident and undoubted sign, but they did injustice to her without due regard and wronged themselves. We only authorize the work of miracles so that the people be moved with a mingled feeling of fear and reverence toward Allah (and realize the evil consequence of disobeying or denying Him).
    60. And for once We told you, Prophet, that Allah encompassed mankind. (Therefore, declare Allah’s message and do not ever be afraid.) We only made you see the vision of glory We presented to you in your night journey to test the inclination of the mankind and their moral attributes. The same purpose was also served by the accursed tree growing in the bottom of Hell to feed the sinners. We purposed that the disbelievers be moved with a mingled feeling of fear and veneration toward Allah and (realize the evil consequence of disobeying and denying Him). But on the contrary, it only makes them increase in great inordinance.
    61. We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves to Adam.” And they prostrated to him in comely order (praise, and admiration) except Iblis (Satan-to-be), who said, “Shall I prostrate myself before him whom You created from clay? (You created me from fire, and therefore I am better than he is.)”
    62. And he added, “Do You see that creature whom You treated with more honor than You treated me? If You defer me from death till the Day of Judgment, I will bridle his offspring, control them, and misguide them excepting a few (whom You have kept away from wrongdoing).”
    63. “Reprieve is granted,” said Allah, “for which reason, you and those of them who follow you will suffer the fatal consequence. Hell will be ample requital of the manner in which you conducted yourselves in life.
    64. “Entice those of them whom you can allure to brighter worlds with your (whispering) voice and assault them by any means your cavalry and your infanty, and have shares with them in their gains and children and promise them.” In effect what Satan promises them is only what is vain, deceptive, and deluding.
    65. “Indeed,” Allah added, “My devout servants do not come under your authority (nor do you have the power to influence their conduct or actions), and enough is Allah to be their Ever-Trustee from Whom they seek help in getting rid of you.”
    66. It is your Lord (Allah) Who keeps the ships afloat and makes them move on the surface of the sea to be of service in seeking the objects of His Grace and Bounty. Indeed, He has been always Ever-Merciful to you.
    67. And when you are befallen with a misfortune or with a distressful condition at sea, those whom you invoke besides Him err away. And when He delivers you safe ashore, you veer away from Him. So man has always been inclined to disbelief.
    68. Do you disbelievers feel really secure that He will not cause that a side of the land to cave you down? Or are you sure that He will not make you suffer the disastrous consequences of a whirlwind with a squall of gravel? And no one will you find then a trustee to afford you protection or to render void Our decree.
    69. Or do you feel really secure that He will not send you back to sea on another occasion and send against you a rumbling wind of considerable strength that drowns you in requital of your disbelief? And no avenger will you find against Us on your behalf.
    70. We have honored the children of Adam, and We provided them with means of transportation to carry them on land and sea, and We provisioned them with good, wholesome things, and We graced them above many of Our creatures, and We endowed them with distinguished attributes. 
    71. And the Day will come when We call all folks, each nation with its respective leader, who is to bear witness to the behavior of his people and their conduct in life. There and then those who are given their book of their record in life in their right hand will be delighted to read their records, and no one will ever be wronged, not even to the equivalent of a single hair or the dry integument of the smallest seed, or a date-plaiting.
    72. And he who has been blind here below will be just as blind in the hereafter, more astray from the way.
    73. The disbelievers tried their best to tempt you, Muhammad, and incite you to make some concessions. They thought they had almost seduced you into a course of action totally undivine in terms of the deletion of certain passages of what Allah has revealed, and fabricating others. And then they would have accepted you as a close fellow in their circles (but you were not to do this because you are Our honorable Messenger).
    74. Had We not confirmed you and impelled you to the feeling of authority and security of position, you would have gone along with them up to a point, thinking that with making a small concession you would succeed in making them firm believers in Islam some day.
    75. But then, by consequence, We would have made you taste a double punishment in life and in the hereafter, and no protector would be found against Us.
    76. They were resolved to impel you to the feeling of fear to make you resolve to quit the land and depart from Makkah. But then they would have been allowed to linger only for a short time after you (wherefore We vanquish them and destroy them).
    77. This has always been Allah’s enactment, which has long been pursued in the past with those of the messengers whom We sent before you in time. This enactment, you will find, will never alter.
    78. You just engage in the act of prayer for Allah at the point of time of the sun’s declination from the meridian of the sky as it begins to sink toward setting and onward to the time when the dusk of the night prevails—namely, the dawn, noon, afternoon, evening, and night prayers. And noteworthy is the Qur’an when recited at dawn; it is attended by the angels who witness its perusal.
    79. And keep vigil during the hours of the night with the Qur’an in additional devotional prayer, which is meritorious and adds to your credit. May Allah your Creator elevate you to a position of great honor, excellence, and glory.
    80. And call upon Allah in your invocatory prayer thus: “O Allah, make my entry upon the stage of life an entry by the gate of truth wherefore I stay my course in accordance with the divine standard. And make my exit at the end of my doings vested with fidelity and truthfulness. And grant me the authority of vindication over my enemies.”
    81. And say, “Truth has now come and falsehood has expired, for falsehood is always apt to expire (in the wreck of time).”
    82. And We have sent down of the Qur’an what serves as a remedy and a mercy to those whose hearts have believed; whereas it adds to the loss of the unjust wrongdoers.
    83. When We mercifully bring man in Our grace and show it in Our munificence, he veers away and entires from what Allah inclines him to propound, and when he is befallen with evil he nurses despair.
    84. Say to them, “Everyone acts according to his inherent disposition or character, and your Lord (Allah) knows quite well who exercises his will to be guided to Allah’s way.”
    85. Instigated by the Jews, they ask you, Muhammad, about the Spirit (ruh). Say to them, “The spirit is of the Command of my Lord (that transcends human comprehension), for you have been given but a little of His knowledge.”
    86. If We decided, We could take away memory, Muhammad, all that We have revealed to you of divine discourse, and you will find no trustee against Us on your behalf.
    87. But it is only through the mercy of Allah your Lord that it continues to be preserved. Indeed, (great is His bounty and) much is His grace that abounds in you.
    88. Say to them, “It could not be more emphasized that if both mankind and the jinn should gather together to come up with a book like the Qur’an, never will they be able to come up such a book even with the help of one party to the other.”
    89. We have propounded for mankind and oriented Our revelations in the Qur’an to circumstances and requirements, and (We quoted every typical instance forming a particular case of a principle) yet most mankind simply refuse to acknowledge the truth and accept nothing but disbelief.
    90. They say to you, Muhammad, “We will not believe you until you have caused a fountain to gush forth and flow in a constant stream out of the ground (of Makkah).
    91. “Or until you have an garden in Makkah enclosing palm trees and vines, and you cause the earth to erupt in its midst forming channels for water to flow forever.
    92. “Or until you have caused the sky to fall on our heads in pieces as you claimed it would, or until you have brought Allah and His angels together before us.
    93. “Or until we have seen you residing in a home adorned (with gold), or until we have seen you ascending heavenward, nor will we believe in your ascent until you have brought down a book that we can read.” Say to them, “Praise be to my Lord (Allah) and extolled are His glorious attributes! Am I in any respect any but a mortal messenger?”
    94. In effect nothing holds back mankind from belief (as ordained by Allah), despite His sending messengers to guide them (but their presumption upon Providence. “Is it conceivable,”) they say, “that Allah sends to mankind a mortal messenger?”
    95. Say to them, “If it were possible for angels to feel safe and secure when they move about on the earth here below, We would have sent down to them an angel as a messenger.”
    96. Say to them, “Enough is Allah to be my witness and your witness; He is indeed All-Knowing and All-Seeing, Whose constant vigilance is extended to all His bondmen.”
    97. He whom Allah guides to His path of righteousness is the one who is guided (by the spirit of truth). But those whom Allah sends astray, never will you find for them patrons besides Him. We will muster them drawn on their faces on the Day of Judgment, blind, dumb, and deaf to be delivered to their appropriate abode in Hell, which is constantly fed with fuel. As often as it abates We feed it so that they suffer the increasingly fierce and merciless flames of the fire.
    98. This is in recompense of their (denial of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, and of their) refusal to acknowledge His revelations and signs. And they insolently voice their denial of resurrection thus: “Is it conceivable that when we have been reduced to bones and fragments we will be raised again to life and created anew?”
    99. Do they not perceive by visual tokens that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, is All-Determiner enough to re-create the like of humans and jinn and restore the dead to life and create them anew? It is He Who determined their term of life beyond suspicion (which He decreed to end at a certain and undoubted point of time); yet the unjust disbelievers refuse to acknowledge the truth.
    100. Say to them, “If you disbelievers were to have the power of governing and controlling the vast treasuries of Allah’s mercy, you would have exercised holding back by virtue of your apprehension and for fear of want. Nonetheless, man has always been characterized by grudging parsimony.”
    101. We brought Musa (Moses) nine evident signs. You, Muhammad, just ask the Children of Isra’il about the course of events relative to Musa as he presented himself to Pharaoh and his people. Pharaoh said to him, “I do think that you, Musa, are, indeed, bewitched.”
    102. “But you know,” said Musa, “that no one could have sent down these divine and evident signs but The All-Powerful Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He made them clear to the understanding and judgment. In effect, I think that you, Pharaoh (are obstinate) unyielding to the truth; and with unerring doom.”
    103. Pharaoh decided on what he thought would be the best course of action, namely, to rid the land of Musa and the Children of Isra’il, but We drowned him together with all those with him.
    104. Following Pharaoh’s drowning, We said to the Children of Isra’il, “Now you may have your abode in the holy land in the Levant, and when the promised Day of Judgment comes to pass, We will gather you and all the others from wherever you may be.”
    105. In truth We sent down the Qur’an, and in conformity with fact and in agreement with the truth has it been revealed. We have only sent you, Muhammad, as a bearer of glad tidings and a warning.
    106. A Qur’an that has been revealed at intervals so that you may recite it, Muhammad, to the people slowly and deliberately. We revealed it in succeeding stages.
    107. Therefore, say to the disbelievers, Muhammad, “Believe in it or do not believe in it; those to whom We imparted knowledge, and wisdom before it was revealed, collapse upon their faces in reverence and submission. When it is recited to them, they cast themselves down prostrate in humility and veneration.”
    108. And they say, “Praise be to Allah our Creator, and extolled are His glorious attributes! Indeed, the promise of Allah inevitably comes to pass and is always fulfilled.”
    
    109. The Qur’an makes them collapse upon their faces weeping, and as they stand in awe of their Creator, they prostrate themselves in profound reverence and humility*.
* A prostration should be performed here.

    110. Say to the polytheists who reject the attribute All-Merciful, “Invoke Allah or invoke The All-Merciful, whichever you choose, for to Him belong all the graceful names that are the Fairest Names in which His unique qualities are ascribed.” In the act of prayer, Muhammad, just entertain the profound reverence due to Allah. And do not voice your prayer loudly nor pronounce it inaudibly, but hold a middle way between the two extremes.
    111. And express your praise to Him in words for His oneness, thus: “Praise be to Allah Who did not beget a son. There is no one to share His divine nature or His realm, nor is He dependent upon a guardian to protect Him from harm and from humiliation. And magnify Him highly for His imposing magnificence.”
