SURAH 18
AL-KAHF
The Cave
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with praising Allah for sending down the glorious Qur’an. It shows that the Qur’an is a warning and joyful tidings. The Qur’an includes a warning to those who claimed that Allah has begotten a son. The surah mentions how the Prophet is keen on the belief of those whom he called to the path of Allah. Then it mentions the story of the people of the cave, who slept then rose after they had spent 309 years. They were a number of the People of the Book, who fled from the persecution of their ruler. They lay there for this duration of time, then were resurrected in a token of Allah’s omnipotence over resurrection after death.
    After this, Allah commands His Prophet to recite the Qur’an and to give warnings and joyful tidings by means of it. He then shows the condition of the people of Paradise and those of the Fire. Allah gives a parable of two men: a rich one who takes pride in his wealth and progeny, and another who obeys Allah. Allah shows that His sovereignty is the truth, that the adornment of this life below is doomed to annihilation, and that there will either be eternal bliss or painful torment on the Day of Resurrection. Then Allah mentions the story of Musa (Moses) with the righteous man who was given knowledge from Allah. In this narrative Allah shows that man is ignorant, even if he is a prophet sent by Allah, unless Allah grants him knowledge. Then there is a mention of Thul-Qarnayn and how he reached the far east and built a barrier. The surah then deals with the Day of Resurrection and what is going to happen on that Day and the reward awaiting believers. Then the surah mentions Allah’s absolute knowledge of everything and His words that have no end. The surah concludes by showing the way to satisfying Allah.

    1. Praise be to Allah, Who sent down to His servant the Qur’an (well founded, constant, resolute) and did not allow therein obliquity or crookedness.
    2. But [it is] straight, in accordance with what is divinely and authoritatively established as the truth so that it strongly warns the impious of the violence laid upon the damned. It announces joyful tidings to those who believe and do righteous deeds, to expect a distinguished reward.
    3. The reward is Paradise, wherein they will stay to eternity.
    4. And to give a warning against those who say that Allah has taken to Himself a child.
    5. Neither they nor their fathers have the true knowledge that is consistent with fact and reality. How enormous, monstrous, and atrocious is the word they project and which comes out of their mouths! Indeed, what they utter is nothing but a lie.
    6. Seemingly, you, Prophet, are consuming yourself over their tracks with distress and torturing yourself lest they should not believe this divine discourse.
    7. We have caused the material world on earth to be of the nature of an adornment in order to (test the peoples’ reaction to the grace of Allah and) distinguish those of them who will do more pious deeds.
    8. One day We will render the face of the earth arid dry, barren and destitute of vegetation.
    9. Have you meditated, Muhammad, upon the event of the inmates of the cave and the Inscription of their names (and upon Allah’s intervention exhibiting His control over the laws of nature and serving as evidence of His almightiness and omnipotence). It stood as a wondrous sign.
    10. A group of young men resolved to escape persecution. They took themselves to a cave in a mountain near by as an abode, where they invoked Allah thus: “O Allah our Lord, extend to us of Your mercy what will help us endure our tribulation, and direct us to the right way determining what You commend for us of future events.”
    11. We, in response, struck them on their ears and induced them to sleep for a number of years.
    12. Then We raised them so that We see which of the two arguing parties would come closer to the span of time they lingered (dormant as a marvel of Allah correlative with resurrection).
    13. We will narrate to you, Messenger, in truth, the incidents of their true story. They were a group of young men who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance.
    14. We confirmed their hearts, and declared themselves and revealed their true belief. They said, “Our Lord is Allah, Lord of the heavens and the earth. Never will we invoke besides Him another god, for then we will have uttered injudicious error against Him.”
    15. “These are our people,” they said to each other, “who have pitifully taken other gods besides Him. If only they would present an authoritative evidence in support of their assumption! In effect they presumed upon Providence, and who is more unjust than he who intentionally fabricates what is false and ascribes lies to Allah?”
    16. “If you should remove yourselves,” said some of them, “from their society (and not participate in their system of faith and worship), then go to the abode in the cave where Allah will extend to you of His mercy what abounds in you and conveniently help you endure your tribulation and overcome your difficulties.”
    17. You could see the sun, Muhammad, as it rose declining from their cave to the right and as it set passing away to the left while they occupied a gap within in a state of dead sleep—a wondrous sign from Allah, indeed. He whom Allah guides to His path is indeed guided to all truth; whereas he whom Allah leads into error—never will you find for him a rectifying patron.
    18. You would have reckoned that they were awake though they were lying down. And We turned them over from one side to the other, right and left, while on the threshold lay their dog with his forelegs outstretched. If you had viewed them you would have run away from them, making your flight filled with horror.
    19. As We aroused them, We made them rise again into activity only to question each other as to the length of time they had lain to rest. “How long do you think you have been sleeping in this place?” asked one of them. “Probably a day or less,” they said. “(Allah) your Lord knows best how long. Meantime, send one of you with this silver coin to the city in quest of the best food, and he brings back some of it (to satisfy our hunger). But he must be courteous and not attract attention directly to himself nor indirectly to you.”
    20. “For, should they get the better of you,” he continued, “they will pelt you with stones or else turn you to their creed, and you will never prosper here and in the hereafter.”
    21. Thus, We ordained that their identity be revealed so that they would know that the promise of Allah is truth manifest and that the Day of Judgment is above suspicion. The people, who by then had conformed to Allah’s will, contended the number and the event and its significance, some resolving to construct a building on the site. Their Lord knows them best. Others, whose decision prevailed, resolved to erect a mosque on the site.
    22. Tossed with their controversies, the People of the Book were divided in opinion relative to the number of the young men, and in the course of time, some will say, “They numbered three, their dog was the fourth.” Others will say, “Five, their dog the sixth,” guessing at the Unseen; whereas others will say, “Seven, and their dog the eighth.” Say to them, Muhammad, “Allah knows best their number; it is only a few who have been given the knowledge of the number (and the significance of the event).” Therefore, do not wrangle, Muhammad, in the heat of their dispute, but treat the subject from an objective standpoint only so as to exhibit the outward facts and never seek pronouncement from any of them upon the event.
    23. Therefore, do not say, "I am doing something tomorrow,
    24. Except if it be the will of Allah.” And should you forget this divine axiom, remember your Lord to guide you to a better choice than that which you had before: “I pray and beseech You, O Allah, to guide me to near rectitude.”
    25. They, the young men, lingered in the cave for three hundred years (solar calendar) with an additional nine years (lunar calendar).
    26. Say to them, Messenger, “Allah alone knows how long they lingered in the cave. Knowledge of the mysteries of the heavens and the earth is a divine attribute of Allah. To Him (belongs) the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. How well He beholds, and how well He hears. They have, apart from Him, any patron; and He does not associate in His Judgment anyone.
    27. And recite, Messenger, what has been revealed to you of the Qur’an of Allah, Whose words no one can alter. Nor will you find besides Him a protector to afford you shelter.
    28. Be patient, Messenger, and rest content with those who invoke Allah’s mercy morning and evening in quest of nothing but His acceptance and His Face. And let not your  eyes turn aside from them or vacillate between them and the worldly-minded, setting your thoughts upon the ephemeral and fleeting glories of the world. Nor should you obey the one whose heart We made heedless of Our remembrance, following his prejudices, and who has gone to all excess.
    29. And say to them, “(Allah’s) your Lord's truth has come to guide us to all truth, and he who wishes to believe  is free to do so, and he who wishes to disbelieve is free to do so.” We have prepared for the disbelievers a fire whose scorching and merciless flames beset them on all sides. As often as they cry for help they are given a draught of boiling water like molten brass or molten lead scalding the faces. Miserable is the drink and odious is the resting place!
    30. Indeed, those whose hearts have believed in Allah and have done their deeds with wisdom and piety are the recipients of Allah’s mercy and divine reward. We never annul, cancel, or render unprofitable the due reward accruing from a good deed.
    31. Such persons are promised the Gardens of Eden beneath which rivers run. They are adorned therein with golden bracelets and are dressed in green silken attire and rich brocade and are reclining on dignified couches. How excellent is the reward and how excellent is the resting-place!
    32. Give them, Messenger, the example illustrating the two men. On one of them, the rich, We bestowed two gardens enclosing grapevines and surrounded by palm trees with plants in between.
    33. Both gardens yielded their produce in due season and never failed to yield all that both will hold, and in their midst We caused a river to erupt with a copious stream.
    34. Abundant was the produce so that the rich boasted and said to his fellow man, the poor, “I have more wealth than you have. I have abundant means at command and my family and my men far exceed yours in number and might.”
    35. The rich man entered his garden exclaiming being unjustly proud, “I cannot imagine that this garden will ever perish in the wreck of time.
    36. “Nor do I think that the Final Hour of Judgment will come up, and even if it does and I am sent back to (Allah) my Lord, I will surely find a better one.”
    37. Speaking with him on this point, his fellow, the poor man, said to him, “Do you disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust, then from a sperm drop of fluid emitted, then He molded you in the shape of a man! 
    38. “As for me, He is Allah my Lord, and I do not associate other deities with my Lord.
    39. “If only when you entered your garden you had exclaimed ‘Praise be to Allah; whatever He wills will be; no one can command power but Him.’ If you do see me in comparison less than you in wealth and children,
    40. “Perhaps Allah will bestow on me what is better than your garden. And He may send against it from heaven a thunderbolt reducing it into a slippery and unproductive piece of land.
    41. “Or He may cause its water source to sink below a reachable level (so that by trying to reach what is beyond your reach, you reach nothing at all).”
    42. Suddenly were his fruits not harvested but suffered to rot to nothing. There, he kept wringing the palms of his hands in token of grief caused by the loss of what he had spent on it. There stood the orchard so desolate, empty but of dilapidated trellises over hills of ruin. There and then he said, “I wish I had not associated other deities with Allah my Lord.”
    43. Nor did he have a cooperative group to afford him help besides Allah, nor could he vindicate himself.
    44. There, it becomes evident that the only indisputable help and patronage come from Allah, The All-Powerful Who is the Truth, and the best purveyor of divine requital, and the only power that commands the final end.
    45. Express to them, Messenger, the likeness of life here. It is as water We send down from the heaven; it mingles with the product of the earth, which absorbs it and thrives thereby; then it eventually withers into chaff and gets winnowed by the winds. And Allah has always been All-Determiner, capable of doing all things.
    46. Wealth and children feature the adornment and allurement exciting the pleasurable emotion of people in life here below, but what is infinite in future duration—considered by Allah to have eternal consequences and hopeful requital—are the deeds imprinted with righteous and piety.
    47. The Day will come when We set the mountains in motion and you see the earth bare of the natural objects it once had, and We will have mustered all people to judgment, leaving not one behind.
    48. They will be set before Allah, your Lord, in rows and be told, “Now you have come back to Us (open to view, and unprotected) as We created you the first time, yet you asserted earlier upon Providence and took for granted that We would not predetermine for you an appointment.”
    49. Now the Book of personal records is laid open to view, and you will see the criminals timorous at its contents and struck with sudden fear and apprehension of danger. They say, “Woe betide us! This book does not leave out a minor or a major offense unrecorded.” And they will find that every single deed, good or bad, is recorded, and then they will realize that Allah your Lord does no injustice to anyone.
    50. For once We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves to Adam in greeting.” And the angels prostrated to Adam in comely order, except Iblis (Satan-to-be), who was a jinn juxtaposed to the angels, and by consequence he rebelled against his Lord's Command. So conditioned, do you people take him and his offspring as patrons besides Me when they are your avowed enemy? Miserable, indeed, is the substitute adopted by the unjust.
    51. Never did I invite any creature, to witness or to be associated with the event of the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor of themselves. It is not Allah Who would use the support of others, much less the wicked who mislead people.
    52. The Day will come when Allah says to the disbelievers, “Call forth My ‘associates' that you presumed shared My divine nature and omnipotence,” and they will do so, but their gods will give back no response. And We established between them and their gods in the life below a chasm.
    53. And the criminals will see the Fire open to view and realize that they will have to fall headlong therein and that there is no escape.
    54. And We have expounded and oriented Our revelations in this Qur’an to circumstances and requirements, and We expressed many parables, but man has always been known to raise disputes about most things (and to try to find fault unfairly and without good reason).
    55. What kept people back from accepting the truth and to believe as guidance came to them, and ask forgiveness from their Lord, except until the same  calamities befell them that befell those of old, or until they saw the torment face to face.
    56. We do not send the messengers but to serve as givers of glad tidings and warnings. But the disbelievers try to seek everywhere vain proofs and false arguments for which they are ready to dispute to their life’s end to refute the truth. They indignantly mocked at My signs, My revelations, and My warnings, and they laugh them to scorn.
    57. And who is more unjust than he who has been reminded of Allah’s evident signs and revelations and shuns them, forgetting what his hands have committed? The fact is that We enshrouded their hearts with lids to preclude them from exercising understanding and struck them deaf. And if you call them to accept the spirit of truth, they will never acknowledge Providence as their guide.
    58. If Allah your Lord, the Source of true forgiveness and divine mercy, were to censure them for their demerits, He would have hastened them to their painful torment. But We have determined for them a point of time (when they will be destroyed), and they will find no one besides Allah to afford them retreat.
    59. Such were the towns of old whose inhabitants We did away with when they proved themselves unjust, and We determined the appointment at which We carried this punishment into effect.
    60. Once Musa (Moses) said to his attendant, “l will not give up journeying until I have reached the junction of the two seas (said to be the juncture of the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, or probably the two arms of the Red Sea) irrespective of how many epochs it takes, be it a year, a decade, or longer.”
    61. And when they had reached the junction of the two waters, they forgot that they had carried a fish for their meal. The fish had stealthily found its way to the sea, where it disappeared.
    62. And when they had journeyed beyond that spot (unaware of the incident), Musa said to his attendant, “It is time to eat. Bring us our meal; we are exhausted. This journey has caused fatigue to us.”
    63. “Do you remember the rock,” asked the attendant, “to which we resorted on the way? I had forgotten all about the fish, and this was a lapse of memory effectuated by Satan, who made me forget to mention it to you. It mysteriously took its way to the sea in a most astonishing manner.”
    64. “This is exactly the place we were seeking,” said Musa. They went back retracing their footsteps.	
    65. There they found one of Our bondmen to whom We extended mercy from Our Providence and to whom We imparted of knowledge from close to Us.
    66. Musa asked him, “May I follow you with the provision that you agree to convey to me of the righteous knowledge (imparted to you by Allah)?”
    67. The righteous teacher said to Musa, “But you will never be able to bear with me patiently, nor will you quietly await the course of events.”
    68. He added, “And how could you put up with something whose significance you do not know, nor do you encompass with your cognizance?”
    69. “But you will find me forbearing, Allah willing,” said Musa, “and I will not disobey any of your commands.”
    70. “Therefore,” said the righteous teacher, “if you should follow me, then do not look for the how and the why and the wherefore until I have given you a mention of it.”
    71. And there they made their way onward until they boarded a ship, in the bottom of which the teacher made a hole (to sink it). There Musa said, “Have you scuttled it to drown its passengers? You have, indeed, committed a grave thing.”
    72. The righteous teacher said to Musa, “Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear with me or show patience with my actions?”
    73. Musa said, “Please do not reproach me for my lapse of memory, nor impose on me an action hard to understand.”
    74. Again they made their way onward until they met a lad, whom the teacher killed. There and then Musa exclaimed, “Have you killed a person when the lad committed no murder? You have, indeed, committed a truly maleficent act.”
    75. The righteous teacher said, “Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear with me or show patience with my actions?”
    76. “Indeed,” said Musa, “if ever I should question anything you do from now on, then do not accompany me any longer; you have been patient enough to get an excuse from me.”
    77. Again they made their way onward until they came across a town where they asked the people for food, but the people neither offered (nor afforded welcome to strangers) and consequently refused them hospitality. So they made their way onward only to find a wall about to collapse. The righteous teacher repaired it and brought it back to its original state, and there Musa exclaimed, “Had you willed, you could have charged a reward for it.”
    78. “Now is the turning-point,” said the teacher. “We break off and part from each other. And now I will give you the interpretation of all the events you were unable to endure patiently.”
    79. “As for the ship,” said the righteous teacher, “it belonged to indigent seamen, and I intended to make it defective to prevent their king, who pursues boat owners, from taking their boat by force.
    80. “As for the young man, his parents are righteous people and he would have oppress them with inordinance and disbelief.
    81. “We decided to exchange him with another child who would be a symbol of faith, kindness and mercy.
    82. “As for the wall,” the righteous teacher said, “it constitutes a part of the property belonging to two orphan youngsters in the city, and it rested directly on a treasure. Their father was a righteous man, and Allah has decreed that they reach maturity and dig out their treasure, an act of mercy vouchsafed by Allah your Lord. I did not do that of my own accord; there you have the interpretation of the incidents you could not patiently endure.”
    83. Some ask you, Muhammad, about Thul-Qarnayn (which means “the one with two horns”). Say to them, “I will recite to you an account (of some of his actions).”
    84. Allah says, “We established him on earth, and We imparted to him the knowledge of the ways and means of everything.”
    85. And he purposefully led the way.
    86. He took the lead in an expedition toward the west until he reached a body of water where the sun set muddy in a spring and where he found a people over whom We gave him authority. We left to him the manner of dealing with them. “Either you torment them,” We said, “or show them kindness.” 
    87. He stated, “We will torment the unjust wrongdoer here and he will be left to Allah his Lord, to impose upon him the maleficent torment laid upon the damned in the hereafter.	
    88. “Whereas he who believes and does righteous deeds will be recompensed with what is best, and we will treat him kindly and impose on him what he can bear with ease and what sets his mind at rest.”
    89. Again, he purposefully led the way (this time to the east).
    90. He conducted an expedition eastward where the sun rises until he reached an open territory where the sun rose and where the people, who were primitive, had no screen from the sun.
    91. For thus We knew all about him. (He likewise called on the people to believe as he had done before).
    92. Again he purposefully led the way (between east and west).
    93. Until he reached—in his third journey—a stretch of territory towered by two high barriers, beneath which he found a people who could hardly understand a foreign word.
    94. They said to him (through interpreters), “O Thul-Qarnayn, the tribes of Gog and Magog are people who spread corruption in the land. May we apportion to you a tribute in payment of raising a barrier between us that would be invincible against all assaults?”
    95. He said, “What my Lord established me in wealth and power far exceeds your tribute. You just help me with your laborious attempt and strenuous exertion of power, and I will erect a rampart between you.”
    96. “Bring me blocks of iron,” he said, “to fill up the space between the two natural cliffs.” Then he said to them, “Now you may subject it to fire and use your bellows to make it red hot.” And when it softened, he asked them for molten brass to pour on the iron (to weld it into a solid mass).
    97. In consequence, the tribes could not scale it, nor were they able to make their way through it by digging.
    98. At the end Thul-Qarnain said thankfully, “This is a mercy graciously vouchsafed by Allah my Lord, and when Allah’s (my Lord's) predetermined promise comes to pass, He will turn it to dust. The promise of Allah (my Lord) has always been the truth.”
    99. And on the Day when the promise is fulfilled, We will leave the people in an undulating conformation until the trumpet is blown, and then We assemble them all together.
    100. There and then We will bring Hell in view near enough as to be clearly seen by the disbelievers,
    101. Whose eyes were covered from apprehension, knowledge, or perception of My divine nature and My omnipotence and authority and from My signs and revelations. They turned a deaf ear and were unwilling to open their ears.
    102. Do the disbelievers think that they do better by taking My servants as their patrons apart from Me? Indeed, We have prepared Hell and made it ready for the lodging of the disbelievers (whom it asserts as its own).
    103. Say to the disbelievers, Messenger, “Shall We tell you who they are whose deeds in life have lost them the most?
    104. “They are those who presumed conducted themselves in life according to error, and they thought they were doing what is fair.”
    105. It is these who have disbelieved their Lord’s signs and turned deaf to His spirit of truth and to His promise of meeting Him. In consequence, their hopes will be doomed to frustration and their deeds to worthlessness, and on the Day of Judgment We will attach to them no weight.
    106. These are the ill-fated who justly deserve the abode in Hell by reason of their disbelief and disobedience, and by consequence of mocking My revelations and signs and My messengers.
    107. But those whose hearts have truly believed will be the recipients of Allah’s mercy and blessings. We have prepared for them the Gardens of Paradise as a lodging,
    108. Wherein they would have passed to eternity, admitting of no transfer from them.
    109. Say to the people, Messenger, “If the vast body of water on the surface of the globe were a supply serving the purpose of committing my Lord’s words to writing, sooner would the vast body of water be depleted than would the words of my Lord, even if we bring another immense supply.”
    110. Say to them, Messenger, “I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your God is only One God. Therefore, he who acknowledges resurrection and judgment and hopes to meet his Lord has to do righteous deeds and never associate other deities with his Lord nor worship any besides Him.”

