SURAH 19
MARYAM
Mary
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah is Makkan except for verses 58 and 71.  
    The surah starts with letters, as many other surahs do. It includes the story of the birth of Yahya (John), son of Zakariyya (Zachariah). After he had become a very old man and although his wife was barren, Zakariyya invoked Allah to grant him a son. The surah then narrates the story of the virgin Maryam (Mary) and her giving birth to `Isa (Jesus). Then it tells the story of Ibrahim (Abraham), his call to the oneness of Allah, his request to his father to desert idol worship, and the discussion between them about idols and the dominance of Satan.
    The surah refers to the prophets from the progeny of Ibrahim— namely Isma`il (Ishmael), Ishaq (Isaac), and his descendents—then mentions Idris. Then Allah mentions the successors who came after the prophets, both the righteous and the sinful. He mentions that Paradise is the reward for believers and Fire is the punishment for disbelievers. He then shows the status of disbelievers in Hell and refers to the people who went astray by saying that Allah has begotten a son.
    Allah shows the status of the Qur’an, warns the disbelievers, and gives parables of the destruction of the sinful who did not follow the prophets, pointing out that the disbelievers will be destroyed.
 
    1. K (kaf). H (ha). Y (ya). (`ayn). S (sad). These introductory letters are intended to show that the inimitable Qur’an is composed of such letters. They are also intended to call the attention of those who listen to the Qur’an.
    2. This, O Messenger, is a narrative relative to the particular occasion when Allah your Lord extended His mercy to His bondman Zakariyya (Zachariah), 
    3. Who called Allah his Lord in a concealed call.
    4. He said, “O Allah my Lord, I have lived long enough to make my bones feeble and my hair has turned gray, and never has my invocatory prayer to You, Allah my Lord, been unblessed or wretched.
    5. “I only fear that my kindred may not know, after I have met my end, how to serve You, and my wife has been barren. I pray and beseech You, O Allah, to give me through Your efficacious grace a descendent destined to be a patron,
    6. “Who inherits the divine knowledge You imparted to me, and who inherits the possessions of the family of Ya`qub [Jacob] (who had the world all before them). And make him, O Allah my Lord, acceptable to You and to people.”
    7. He was told, “O Zakariyya, We relate to you the glad tidings: it is the procreation of a son named Yahya (John), whose appellation We designated to no one before.”
    8. Zakariyya exclaimed, “How will I have a son when my wife has been barren and I have been carried through to a decrepit age?”
    9. “So be it,” says Allah your Lord. “This is an easy act actuated upon My will, and I created you earlier when you were nothing.”
    10. Zakariyya said, “O Allah my Lord, may I be given a sign.” He was told, “Your sign will be your inability to talk to people for three nights albeit you are in perfect shape.” 
    11. And so he went out of his prayer chamber to his people, and by making signs he indicated to them to thank Allah frequently and to glorify Him and extol His glorious attributes morning and evening. 
    12. Yahya was born and grew up, and he is now addressed thus: “O Yahya, take the Book (the Tawrah, the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and adhere fast to all that We have imparted to you. (And observe the code of discipline and body of regulations, hold them in esteem, and hold to your promise and pay attention.)” And We imbued him with wisdom in his childhood.
    13. And We imbued him with sympathy and tenderness of heart, and We made purity reign in his heart, and he entertained the profound piety due to Allah.
    14. He exhibited a kind and affectionate disposition by his conduct to his parents, and was not arrogant or disobedient.
    15. Peace be unto him the day he was born and the day of his death and on the Day of Judgment when he is restored to life.
    16. Relate, Messenger, to the people what is narrated in the Qur’an about Maryam (Mary) when she withdrew from her family to an eastern chamber (to perform her religious observances).
    17. She screened herself from them, since solitude best serves deep devotion. There We sent to her Our spirit, who appeared as a human all sound.
    18. She exclaimed, “I seek refuge with The All-Merciful counter to your personage (for infringing upon my privacy), if indeed piety reigns in your heart.”
    19. He said, “But I am the Messenger of Allah your Lord. I am assigned to grace you with a son who is stamped with purity.”
    20. “How will I possibly bear a son,” asked Maryam, “when no man has ever touched me, nor am I a prostitute?”
    21. “So be it.” Thus said Allah your Lord. “This is an easy act actuated upon My Will, and We will make him a a sign to mankind of Our omnipotence. He is a mercy from Us to guide the people to all truth, and this matter has already been decreed.”
    22. There, Maryam conceived and retired to a distant place,
    23. (Just to be confronted with the onset of labor.) And there the severe labor pains drove her to the nearby trunk of a palm tree. Overwhelmed with fear mingled with grief, she exclaimed, “I wish I had died before this and were consigned to complete oblivion.”
    24. There and then, a cry of triumph and joy came out from below: “Do not feel grieved. Allah your Lord has provided beneath you a brook (that is moved for you).
    25. “And if you shake the trunk of the palm tree, it will shower you with ripe and delicious dates (in plenty).
    26. “Eat then and drink,” he said, “and compose your countenance and let your eyes speak content. Should you see any mortal, just say, ‘I vowed to Allah The All-Merciful  to fast from talking, so I will not speak today to a human being.’”
    27. She carried the baby home to her people, who exclaimed, “O Maryam, you have committed yourself to a fabricated line of conduct of grave consequence.
    28. “O Maryam, sister of Harun (Aaron) in piety, never was your father a man of adultry nor was your mother a prostitute!”
    29. She simply pointed her finger at the baby with intimation, as it were, that they ask or speak to him. But they exclaimed, “How (in Allah’s Name) can we talk with a baby in the cradle?”
    30. The baby `Isa (Jesus) said, “I am a devout servant of Allah, Who will entrust me with His Book (the Injil) and make me a Prophet.
    31. “He conferred on me benediction that I will be blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined me, for as long as I live, the practice of praying to Him and of paying zakah (alms).
    32. “And that I should be kind and dutiful to my mother, and He excluded arrogance and wretchedness from my nature.
    33. “Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and (on the Day of Judgment) when I am restored to life.”
    34. This is `Isa, the son of Maryam, declaring the truth of his own eventful birth. He was called into existence as stated in divine truth and not in the manner that (the People of the Book) maintain by disputation.
    35. It is never becoming that Allah should take to Him a son. Praise be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! When He decrees a Command, He only says “Be” and it is.
    36. “Allah is my Lord and your Lord,” `Isa continued. "(He exacts obedience and submission from the whole and from all in all.) And so worship him with appropriate acts and rites, for this is the path of righteousness.”
    37. Nevertheless, the various parties found a cause for which they were ready to differ to their life’s end. Woe betide the disbelievers who will not acknowledge Allah’s oneness, and how distressful will be the scene they will have to witness on a Momentous Day!
    38. How acute will be their hearing and their sight on the Day they assemble before Us, on the Day of Judgment when the unjust wrongdoers will realize their evident error!
    39. Warn the wrongdoers, O Messenger, of the Day of regrets when the Command is decreed when convicted by reason of their negligence of Allah’s laws and their disbelief in Him and in His messengers and in resurrection.
    40. They do not seem to realize that it is We Who inherit the earth and the whole and all in all thereon. They all return back to Us (for reckoning).
    41. Narrate to the people, O Messenger, what is said in the Qur’an about Ibrahim (Abraham), who was a man who kept Allah’s truth so sincerely (and his words accorded with his deeds). He was a truthful prophet.
    42. For once he asked his father, “O father, why do you worship objects that are deaf and blind and can avail you (absolutely) nothing?”
    43. “O father,” he continued, “I am a recipient of divine knowledge imparted to me and not imparted to you. So follow me, and I will guide you to the level path (that leads you to the truth and happiness).”
    44. “My father,” he said, “do not worship Satan. He incites you to worship idols, and he exercised open and determined disobedience to Allah, The All-Merciful.”
    45. “O father,” he added, “I am afraid lest a punishment should touch you from The All-Merciful in requital of your submission to Satan, and that will make you a patron to him in the Fire.”
    46. There the father exclaimed, “Do you, Ibrahim, drop my gods into oblivion and dismiss them as unfit for worship? Unless you refrain from disqualifying them, I promise I will pelt you with stones. You would better forsake me for some time so that you do not draw my wrath on you and until I have calmed down.”
    47. “Peace be upon you, father,” said Ibrahim. “I will invoke Allah on your behalf for mercy and forgiveness. Allah has always been hospitable and gracious to me.
    48. “Meanwhile, I will keep apart from your society and remove myself from your atmosphere of idolatry that you profess other than the faith in Allah. I will devote my act of worship to Him alone and invoke Him for forgiveness and look forward to His mercy. Maybe I will not be wretched.”
    49. When he kept himself apart from them and the idols they worshipped besides Allah, We bestowed on him Ishaq (Isaac) and Ya`qub (Jacob), each of whom We made a prophet.
    50. We extended to them Our mercy and made all grace abound in them, and We favored their speaking tongues with prudence and truth that was exalted.
    51. You may narrate to them, Messenger, what is said in the Qur’an about Musa (Moses), who was chosen for his faith and purity. He was a messenger and a prophet.
    52. We called him from the right side of the mount At-Tur (Sinai) and We brought him in a proximate position to honor him and to talk with him.
    53. We mercifully bestowed upon him an assistant, his brother Harun (Aaron), whom We proclaimed a prophet.
    54. Also narrate to the people, Messenger, what is said in the Qur’an about Isma`il (Ishmael), who was true to his promise, and whose words accorded with his deeds. He was a messenger and a prophet.
    55. He always enjoined his family and his people the practice of praying to Allah and the religious duty of zakah, and he was very near and well pleasing to Allah his Lord.
    56. And narrate to the people, Messenger, what is said in the Qur’an about Idris. He was a man who was so sincere (and his words accorded with his deeds); he was a prophet.
    57. We exalted him and graced him with an exalted position.
    58. These aforementioned were among the prophets on whom Allah favored with His blessings. They were the offspring of Adam and of those whom We carried with Nuh (Noah) in the ark and of the posterity of Ibrahim and Isra'il and of the posterity of those whom We guided to all truth and whom We chose to promote the divine knowledge. When Allah’s revelations were recited to them, they fell prostrate in adoration and (were moved with reverential awe that prompted) weeping*.
    59. These righteous people were succeeded by generations who wasted the prayer, and lusted after the worthless. But as there came the Day to those of old, the Day will come to those of today and to those of the future when they will taste the evil consequence here, and worse will it be in the hereafter.
    60. But excluded are those who humbly repented and were wise enough to acknowledge Allah their Lord and did righteous deeds. These and such persons will receive the welcome in Garden, and never will they be unjustly wronged in one way or another.
    61. The All-Merciful has promised the Gardens of Eden, to His devoted servants even though till now it is unseen. Indeed, His promise is truth and will come to pass.
    62. No vain talk will they hear therein, but only peace. And in Allah’s Name will they be greeted with the formula of good wishes and respect, “Peace,” and they will be provided with food and drink morning and evening.
    63. Such is the Garden that will be the eternal inheritance of those of Our devout servants in whom reigned piety.
-----------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    64. In response to the Prophet’s unrest due to the long intervals between revelations, the Angel Jibril (Gabriel) said to him, “We angels do not just come down at Allah’s command. To Him belong all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between, and never is Allah your Lord forgetful.”
    65. Allah is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of all that is between. Therefore, worship Him and revere Him as He deserves, and exercise patience in religious observance and in face of difficulties and hindrances. Think but this: Do you know of any who shares His Divine Name and His divine attributes?
    66. Yet man says to himself, “Would I be resurrected and be restored to life after I have long been dead?”
    67. Does man not remember that We created him in the beginning when he was nothing?
    68. By Allah your Lord, We will muster them together with the Satans and gather them all kneeling girdling round Hell.
    69. Then We will haul up from every sect those who were most disobedient and rebellious against The All-Merciful.
    70. We do know quite well the most deserving roasting among the wide circle of all to the torment to be laid upon the damned in Hell.
    71. None of you people but will go passing by Hell, an inevitable event that is promised by Allah and incumbent upon Him (and no one is destined to escape it).
    72. There, will We lead safely those who entertained the profound piety due to Allah and leave to it, down on their knees, the unjust wrongdoers whom it asserts as its own.
    73. When Our revelations are recited to them—revelations distinctly expressing all that is meant, the disbelievers exclaim to the believers, “Which of the two parties holds a high position in the social scale and status and in society, the nobility who do not follow Muhammad or those who follow him?”
    74. They fail to realize how countless were the generations We destroyed, generations who came to this world before them and were more affluent in wealth and goods and enjoyed more splendor.
    75. Say to the disbelievers, Messenger, “Those who are satisfied with their state of loss in the maze of error will experience more of it. Allah The all-Merciful will give them an extension to allow them free scope of action to commit themselves until the encounter with the promised torment (either at the hands of the Muslims here below or on the Day of Judgment in the hereafter). There and then, will they know who are in the most grievous and dreaded state and have the lesser and weaker hosts!
    76. “But those who chose the path of guidance and Providence is their guide—Allah will make circumstances favorable to them to think better and do better, because the everlasting deeds of righteousness and piety are esteemed by your Lord (Allah) as most rewarding in requital and of so much consequence.”
    77. Do you see, Messenger, the one who totally disbelieves in Our revelations and denies the hereafter as well as Our convincing signs, and mockingly says to his creditor, “I will be given plenty in the hereafter and live in affluence and have numerous offspring (and then I will pay you the debt).”
    78. How insolent to presume upon Providence! Has he been given divine knowledge of the unseen, or has he entered into a covenant with Allah, The All-Merciful?
    79. Never! (But he had better restrain himself from uttering words conveying absurdities.) We will record all that he says and extend the torment to such an extent as he never expected.
    80. We will inherit of all that he said he would have of fortune and offspring, and he will come back to Us all alone.
    81. The disbelievers chose to take besides Allah false gods through whom they seek might.
    82. Never! But they will disbelieve in their zealous devotion and exercise active opposition against them, and as opponents the false gods will obtain their end.
    83. Look, Muhammad, into the way We use the satanic! We send them against the disbelievers to allure them and incite them to do evil.
    84. Therefore, Messenger, do not call upon Allah to hasten the punishment on them. We keep count of their misdeeds and all their pursuits of the world during their numbered days here.
    85. The Day will come when the pious are mustered before The All-Merciful as a presentable and dignified deputation.
    86. And We drive the criminals to Hell like thirsty herd.
    87. No one will have the advantage of intercession except him who has been promised a covenant to this effect by The All-Merciful.
    88. They say, “(Allah) The All-Merciful has taken up a child.”
    89. You blasphemers have instituted a notion that is indeed monstrous, hideous, and atrocious,
    90. (A notion indeed shocking.) Its impact makes the heavens almost tear apart, and the earth cloven down and almost parts asunder, and the mountains collapse razed.
    91.Because they attribute to The All-Merciful a child.
    92. When it is (absolutely) unbecoming, nor is it consonant with His supreme majesty that He should take up a child.
    93. Besides the fact that there is not one single creature in the heavens and on earth but will come back to stand before The All-Merciful as a servant submitting to His authority and surrendering to judgment.
    94. He has counted them and ascertained their number.
    95. All and each will present himself or itself to The All-Merciful all alone (with no vindicators or riches).
    96. But not those who have believed and who have done righteous deeds. They will be the recipients of Allah’s mercy. The All-Merciful will overshadow them with His gracious wing and impart to them His loving care.
    97. We have revealed the Qur’an in a language conducive to ease, worded in your own tongue, Muhammad, in order [for you] to use it when you announce joyful tidings to those pious who entertain the profound reverence due to Allah and to warn the obstinate disdainful people.
    98. How many generations before them have We caused to perish! Look around and see if you can find any one of them or hear their voice, be it uttered loudly or as a murmur?
