SURAH 20
TA HA
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed at Makkah except for verses 130 and 131. It starts with two vocal letters to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an and to make those who hear it listen attentively. It then  mentions the status of the Qur’an and that its honorability is derived from Allah Almighty Who revealed it. He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth Who knows secrets and all that is more hidden and subtle than secrets. The surah then mentions the story of Musa (Moses) with Pharaoh and how Musa’s messengership started and his request that his brother Harun (Aaron) be an assistant to him. Then there is an account of how they met with Pharaoh after they had been reluctant to do this because of his great tyranny. Meanwhile Allah Almighty shows the upbringing of Musa.
    The surah includes the conversation that took place between Musa and Pharaoh, then between Musa and the magicians. It mentions how Musa was afraid lest he should be defeated by the magicians and how they believed and were tortured by Pharaoh. The surah also deals with how Musa and the Children of Isra'îl were saved from Pharaoh, who was drowned when he followed them after the splitting of the sea. The surah tells us how Musa went to At-Tur after he left his people and how he went to converse with his Lord and how the people were tempted by As-Samirî, who whispered to them to worship the golden Calf that sounded as a result of the air passing through it. Musa was angry about what happened and in his anger pulled his brother by the head.
    Then the surah narrates what happeneded to As-Samirî. Allah Almighty points out the lessons to be learned from the stories of Musa and other prophets. At the end of the surah, Allah Almighty gives us honorable commendation of patience, chastity, and prayer. There is also a statement of the adamant demand of polytheists for a miracle other than the Qur’an, and Allah Almighty points out the wisdom behind sending prophets. Finally, the glorious surah concludes by reference to the punishment to be inflicted upon the disbelievers and the reward to be given to the believers.
 
    1. T (ta). H (ha). The surah opens with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. We have not revealed to you, Messenger, the Qur’an to cause you wretchedness nor to put you to trouble,
    3. But to serve as a reminder to those who keep in awe of Allah and entertain the apprehension due to Him—
    4. A disclosure of divine knowledge to man from Him, The All-Merciful Who Created the earth and the heavens of the (imposing) altitude,
    5. The All-Merciful Who levelled Himself on the Throne (of supremacy and dominion),
    6. The All-Merciful to Whom belong all that is in the heavens and on the earth and all that is in between, and all that lies in the depths below the face of the ground.
    7. If you speak aloud, Allah knows what is secret and what is more concealed.
    8. He is Allah, there is no god but Him; to Him belong the Fairest Names.
    9. Has there come to you, Prophet, of the discourse of Musa (Moses)?
    10. He saw a fire from afar; he said to his family, “You stay here. I have just perceived a fire; perhaps I will be able to bring you a brand from the burning wood or be able to find someone who would guide me the way to pursue.”     
    11. And when he reached the fire, he was called to. “O Musa,” Allah said,
    12. “I am Allah your Lord. You are in My presence; therefore, take off your shoes; you are in the Holy Valley, Tuwa.
    13. And I have chosen you (to convey My divine message); therefore, listen to all that will be revealed (to you).
    14. “I am Allah; there is no god but Me. Therefore, worship Me (and adore Me with the appropriate acts and rites), and observe the act of divine worship, remembering Me.
    15. “The predetermined Eventful Hour will (inevitably) come to pass. I would almost conceal it so that every self would be requited with what is commensurate with its endeavors.
    16. “Therefore, do not let those who disbelieve the idea of resurrection and follow their own prejudices bar you from it lest you should divert and topple down.”
    17. “And,” Allah asked, “what is that (you hold) in your right hand, Musa?”
    18. “It is my staff,” Musa said. “I lean on it, and with it I beat the bushes (the shrubs, and the trees to furnish my sheep with food), and I use it for other purposes (such as fending off animals).”
    19. “Cast it down, Musa,” Allah said.
    20. And when Musa did, the staff was instantaneously transformed into a snake in gliding motion.
    21. “Take it, Musa,” Allah said, “and do not be afraid. We will bring it back to its original state.
    22. “Clasp your hand, Musa, to your side; it will come out transfigured in a radiance of white divine light, unharmed and all sound: another sign (of your messengership).
    23. “This is just to show you of Our greatest signs.”
    24. “Go to Pharaoh,” Allah said. “He has tyrannized”
    25. Musa prayed, “Solace me, O Allah my Creator, and expand my breast (to the joyful thought of performing my duty).
    26. “And make my task go easily.
    27. “And loosen the impeding knot of my tongue (to allow me free expression)
    28. “So that people may understand my speech and comprehend all that I say.
    29. “And appoint for me a counsellor from my family,
    30. “Harun (Aaron), my brother,
    31. “To uphold power and to have security of position
    32. “To engage him as associate in my task (Your cause)
    33. “So that much (we glorify You and) extol Your glorious attributes,
    34. “And remember You much,
    35. “For You have beheld us with favor.”
    36. “And there,” Allah said, “you are granted your request, Musa.
    37. “And We have been bounteous to you, Musa, on another occasion
    38. “When We revealed a course of action to your mother what was revealed.
    39. “‘Put the child in the chest,’ We said, ‘and hurl the chest into the river; the waves will drive the chest to the bank, and there he will be picked up by a common enemy of Mine and of his.’ And I endowed you with belovedness and I had an eye upon you so that you grow and develop under My Eye.”
    40. “Your sister,” Allah said, “marches to the gate of the palace and says to the household, ‘Shall I indicate you of an acceptable woman who would nurse and rear the child?’ There, We returned you to your mother so that she would be delighted and her eyes speak comfort, and she would not grieve. Moreover, you killed a man (when helping the Israelite against the Egyptian), and We relieved you and freed you of the anguish and tempted you (heavily). And by consequence you stayed for a number of years among the people of Madyan. Then you were impelled upon My will to come to serve Me here as I had determined, Musa.”
    41. “And I chose you,” Allah said, “for My revelation and to shoulder My message.
    42. “Now, go together with your brother Harun equipped with My divine signs betokening your prophethood and My message, and do not slack Me or My words so that you may remember Me.
    43. “Go you and your brother to Pharaoh. He has transgressed all bounds and played the tyrant.
    44. “And speak leniently to him so that he might, it is hoped, remind himself and entertain a profound apprehesion for Allah.”
    45. Musa and Harun said, “O Allah our Lord, we fear he might show a strong dislike to us or he might play the tyrant.”
    46. “Do not ever be afraid,” Allah said. “I am with you all along. I am All-Hearing, and I see all that is being done.
    47. “Go to him and say, ‘We are Messengers of Allah your Lord. We ask you to release the Children of Isra'îl from bondage and to send them with us and not to torment them. We have brought you an evident sign from Allah your Lord, and peace be upon those who have Providence their guide.’”
    48. “It has been revealed to us by Allah,” they continued, “to indicate that torment will befall whoever cries lies to Allah’s messengers and turns his back upon Allah’s message.”
    49. There Pharaoh said defiantly, “Who is the Lord of you two, Musa?”
    50. “Our God, Allah the Lord,” Musa said, “is He Who gave form and features to every entity He created (and vested each entity with its qualities and attributes), guiding each creature to its inherent role in life.”
    51. “What about the earliest generations?” asked Pharaoh, (“And what do you say to that?”)
    52. “Only Allah knows what happened to them,” they said. “Knowledge of the hidden is an attribute of Him, our Creator, Who puts everything on record, and He never errs or forgets.
    53. “He it is Who made the earth a livable place suitable for your livelihood and furnished it with paths, roads, and channels; and He sent from the heaven water, the means of producing pairs of diverse plants,
    54. “To eat from and put cattle to pasture. Indeed, these are tokens representing convincing divine signs, tokens symbolic of Allah’s omnipotence and authority to those endowed with intelligence.”
    55. From the earth We created you and back to it We will return you at death, and out of it We will bring you once again on the Day of Judgment. 
    56. We presented Pharaoh with all Our evident and convincing signs, but he simply cried lies and refused.
    57. Pharaoh said to Musa, “Have you come back to us to drive us out of our land by your sorcery (with which you killed people, Musa)?
    58. “We will meet your threats with defiance and your sorcery with a similar art. Therefore, make an appointment that neither you nor we will fail to keep, and the place where we meet will be equidistant and open.”
    59. “The appointment,” said Musa, “is on your festive day and the place is where people are mustered for festive celebration in the forenoon.”
    60. There, Pharaoh turned away and gathered a plot of sorcerers and came back.
    61. “Woe betide you,” said Musa to the magicians. “Do not fabricate a lie against Allah lest He should uproot you by a torment He lays upon the damned. The hopes of those who fabricate falsehood are doomed to disappointment.”
    62. There and then the sorcerers contended their plan among themselves in a secret counsel.
    63. They concluded, thus, “These two men, Musa and Harun, are sorcerers planning to drive you people out of your land by their sorcery and do away with your exemplar way.
    64. “Therefore, gather up your plotting and your wits to work out an over-mastering plan and come in imposing lines, for he who gains the upper hand will prosper.”
    65. (Face to face) with Musa, they said to him, “Would you like to cast down your staff first or shall we cast ours first?”
    66. Musa said, “You cast first.” And their ropes and their staffs seemed by their sorcery as though they were living serpents in gliding motion.
    67. A wave of fear swept over Musa in his innermost being (lest people should take sorcery for a miracle).
    68. Allah revealed to him, “Do not be afraid, Musa. You have mastery over them and, indeed, you are most exalted.”
    69. He added, “Cast down what you hold in your right hand. It will swallow up all that they worked out. Indeed, all they presented was simply plotting by sorcerers, and no sorcerer can accomplish a useful purpose nor prosper, no matter where he came from.”
    70. There and then the sorcerers fell prostrate in adoration of divine revelation and said, “We believe in Allah, the Lord of Musa and Harun.”
    71. “Have you believed in,” said Pharaoh, “the god of Musa before I permit you to do so? Indeed, he is your chief who taught you sorcery that has misled you. I will amputate your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will have you all crucified on the trunks of palm trees, and you will come to know which of us can inflict greater and more enduring torment, me or the god of Musa.”
    72. The magicians said to Pharaoh, “We will not look with favor on your system of faith in preference to the truth and the enlightenment we have received, nor in preference to Him Who created us. Therefore, decree what you will; you can only sit in judgment for this life in this world.
    73. “We have believed in our Lord, Allah. May He forgive us our sins and the sinful act of sorcery you forced us to practice. Allah is, indeed, Charitable, and He is Enduring.”
    74. Indeed, he who presents himself to his Lord (Allah), on the Day of Judgment invested with crime will be destined to Hell, wherein he neither dies nor lives.
    75. Whereas he who presents himself a believer to Him impressed with righteous deeds will be rewarded with the highest and most exalted places in life in the hereafter.
    76. They will be rewarded with the abode in the Gardens of Eden beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will have passed to eternity. This is the reward of those who have cleansed themselves from defilement (and purposed to meet their Creator pure in heart).
    77. Meanwhile, We revealed to Musa to conduct My servants by night to the sea and to strike for them a dry path across, and We assured him thus: “You will not be overtaken by Pharaoh. They will not catch up with you, nor should you fear them or the sea.”
    78. Pharaoh in command of his hosts went in pursuit of  Musa  and  his  people, but  Pharaoh  and  his  men  were 
overwhelmed with the sea water, which overpowered them.
    79. In effect, what Pharaoh did was that he led people astray, and never really guided them to a path of righteousness.
    80. O Children of Isra'îl, We delivered you from your enemy and We ordained for you the divine assignation—through Musa on the right side of Mount Sinai to receive the commandments—and We provisioned you with manna, the continual dew of the blessed victuals, and with quails.
    81. And We said to you, “Eat of the good victuals We provisioned you with; do not transgress nor carry anything to excess lest you should come within the measure of My anger, for he who suffers My anger sways his destiny to loss.
    82. “However, I am, indeed, Forgiving; I extend forgiveness to him who repents and believes firmly, and who is guided to righteous deeds until he meets Allah.”
    83. Allah asked, “And what made you hasten on, Musa, and (outstrip) your people?”
    84. “They are tailing me,” Musa said, “but I hastened on to You, Allah my Lord, so that You might be satisfied with me.”
    85. “We have tempted your people, Musa, after you left,” Allah said. “As-Samirî, led them astray.”
    86. And there, Musa returned to his people angry and sorrowful, indeed. He said to them, “My people, did Allah your Lord (not afford you safety and guidance)? Do you believe the covenant took too long or did you intend to come within the measure of His anger and by consequence you failed to keep your promise to me to remain faithful?”
    87. “We did not break our promise of our own accord,” they said, “but we were made to carry encumbrances of ornaments (of Egyptian women, which we thought portend evil), and we hurled them in the fire (to get rid of them), and so did As-Samirî.”
    88. And he fashioned the melted gold into the shape of a calf’s body that lowed like cattle. No sooner did they see a golden calf emitting a sound than they (forgot Allah, Who had delivered them, and) gave themselves up to worshiping the Calf, saying to each other, “This is your god, the god of Musa, whom he forgot, and by consequence he missed his way.”
    89. Did they not see that it was unable to respond to their speech, nor could it harm them or help them?
    90. Harun had said to them earlier, “O my people, you have consented to this temptation while Allah is your Lord, The All-Merciful; therefore, follow me and obey my command.”
    91. But they said to him, “We will not renounce our consecration to the Calf until Musa comes back to us.”
    92. And when Musa returned, he said to Harun, “What kept you, Harun, from acting when you saw them erring away from the path of righteousness?”
    93. “What hindered you,” Musa added, “from following my instructions (and fulfilling your obligation)? Have you disobeyed my command?”
    94. “O son of my mother,” Harun said, “do not take hold me by the beard or by the head. I was afraid you would say I have set the Children of Isra'îl at variance and did not listen to your saying.”
    95. Turning to As-Samirî, Musa ask, “What is this grave matter (that you have fallen into), Samirî?”
    96. “I have seen,” said As-Samirî, “what they failed to see (meaning the Spirit Jibrîl [Angel Gabriel]) and so I took a handful of dust from the track of the messenger of Allah and I tossed it (toward the Calf), for so did my self instigated me.” (A made-up excuse for his unforgivable sinful act.)
    97. “Go away,” Musa said. “You shall be punished in this life by isolation, (and you shall have a conviction of this fact that) you shall say, ‘I am an untouchable.’ That is besides the promised punishment, which will not fail, nor will you be able to escape it (in the hereafter). And now, look at your god to whom you lingered consecrating yourself. We will burn it and blast it in the sea.”
    98. “Indeed,” Musa said, “your god is Allah;  there is no god but Him. His knowledge embraces everything that took place and that will happen.”
    99. Thus do We narrate to you, Messenger, tidings of Musa and preceding nations, and We have given you by Our grace a Book (the Qur’an) helping you to keep Allah in remembrance.
    100. A Qur’an (the spirit of truth) and he who veers away or turns his back upon it, will suffer the heavy burden he carries on the Day of Resurrection.
    101. There and then he and such persons will have passed to eternal suffering. And, indeed, this burden will be odious to them on the Day of Resurrection.
    102. The Day will come when the trumpet is sounded and We muster the criminals, who will look blue, being stricken with terror.
    103. They whisper to each other in a hushed voice, guessing their duration in life below, and some think it was so short that it lingered only ten days.
    104. We know best what they say, but those among them with veracious exemplary life will say, “You lingered no more than one day.”
    105. And they ask you, Messenger, about the mountains. Say to them, “Allah my Lord will blast them,
    l06. “So that He leaves them leveled with the ground’s smooth-faced surface,
    107. “Wherefore you cannot see curves, elevations, or curving (as if it were never inhabited before).”
    108. There and then all resurrected beings will faithfully follow the announcer who, with no crookedness, marches straight on, and all voices submit to The All-Merciful and you can only hear the soft and fair submitting sound (of their footsteps treading the straight path).
    109. This is the Day when no intercession will be accepted from anyone on behalf of another except from him who is granted permission from Allah The All-Merciful on the basis of his virtuous attributes, and his speech is acceptable to Him.
    110. He knows full well what doings they have brought into His presence, and He knows their past which they do not presently comprehend nor do they encompass what Allah knows.
    111. All countenances will be subservient before Him, The Ever-Living, The Omnipotent Sustainer (Who preserves existence). But defeated and miserably disappointed of their expectations will be those who bear the burden of iniquity and unjust actions.
    112. And he who imprints his deeds with righteousness and he is a believer will not fear injustice nor forfeiture of privileges.
    113. Thus have We revealed it—the Qur’an—in the Arabic literary form, and therein We expounded enough threats that they may keep on piety of Allah or keep Him in remembrance.
    114. Exalted be Allah and extolled are His glorious attributes, The Supreme Sovereign. Do not rush, Muhammad to recite the Qur’an before the revelation is completed (that is, while the Angel Jibrîl is imparting the divine revelation) and invoke Allah to augment your knowledge (thus: “O Allah, my Lord, advance my knowledge by means of the Qur’an”).
    115. We made a covenant with Adam, but he forgot and We found him of no resolve. 
    116. We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves to Adam.” And the angels prostrated to Adam in comely order, praise, and admiration, except Iblîs, who was among them although he was a jinn, and who refused.
    117. And there We said to Adam, “This Iblîs is an avowed enemy to you and to your spouse; let him not drive you out of the Garden, so that you will be wretched.”
    118. “Herein you will never suffer hunger or go naked.
    119. “Nor will you suffer thirst or be exposed to the parching heat of the sun.”
    120. But Satan (cunningly) whispered to him (instigating evil). He said to Adam, “Shall I indicate to you the tree of eternity and the kingdom which suffers no decay?”
    121. (Deceived by Satan’s allurement and consenting to his enticement,) they both ate of the tree and there, their private parts were displayed so that they realized how shameful this was. They kept splicing leaves from the trees of Garden to cover their naked bodies, which aroused their sense of shame, and there Adam disobeyed Allah His Lord and became misguided from the path of righteousness.
    122. But Allah his Lord reclaimed him and selected him for messengership, accepted his repentance, and guided him to the path of righteousness.
    123. “Upon Our command,” Allah said, “We down both of you from here some of you an enemy from the others. You will receive from Me truth guiding into all truth, and he who follows the path of righteousness and has Providence as his guide will not err, nor suffer wretchedness.”
    124. And he who veers away from My truth that guides into all truth will live a life of cramped misery and hardness of fate and circumstances, and We will muster him on the Day of Resurrection as blind.
    125. Then he will say, “O Allah my Lord, why have You mustered me blind when in life I was able to behold?”
    126. “That is it,” Allah says. “You blinded yourself to Our revelations and signs, and you forgot them, and by consequence you are this day forgotten.”
    127. Thus do We recompense him who has exceeded his limitations and who did not believe in his Lord's (Allah’s) revelations and signs. And the torment hereafter is, indeed, more strict and more enduring.
     128. Do they, Muhammad, get guidance from the significance of Allah’s penalties? And have they failed to realize how many generations before them did We cause to perish? They tread their dwellings they once occupied (and they see with their own eyes the consequence of disobeying Allah). Indeed, such outcome is emblematic of Allah’s signs recognized by people of intelligence.
    129. Had it not been for word proclaimed by your Lord beforehand (to put punishment in respite) it would have been timely to plant their hereafter in the now, but We grant them respite up to a predetermined point of time.
    130. Therefore, be patient, Messenger, and put up with what they (insolently and defiantly) say, and praise Allah, your Creator, and extol His glorious attributes before sunrise and before its sunset and some time during the night and at both ends of the day so that you may, it is hoped, be satisfied with Allah’s distinguished reward.
    131. And do not strain your sight wistfully, Muhammad, at the advantages We gave to some among some sects of disbelievers; it is the flower of life below and it is a means of temptation. (It is the gist with which We test their response and their behavior;) whereas the blessed provision by Allah in the hereafter is charitable personified and more enduring.
    132. And command your family to observe the act of prayer, and you persevere in observing it patiently and in maintaining your piety. We do not expect you to provide sustenance for yourself. It is We Who provide for you and for all, and the happy ending is the reward for piety (and righteousness).
    133. And the disbelievers (insolently and defiantly) say, “If only he (the Prophet) comes up to us with a sign (other than the Qur’an) from his Creator to evince both his wisdom and the truth of his mission!” Have they not been presented with enough signs in former Scriptures (which also foretold future events)?
    134. If We had caused them to perish before this Book (the Qur’an) was revealed, they would have said, “O Allah our Lord, if only You had sent to us a messenger (with the truth), we would have acknowledged Your revelations and signs and followed Your path of righteousness before we were humiliated and disgraced!”
    135. Say to them, Messenger, “Each of us awaits what lies in store for him; therefore, you wait until the Eventful Day comes to pass and then you will come to know which of us followed the level path of righteousness and who had Providence as their guide.”


