SURAH 21
AL- ANBIYA 
The Prophets
Revealed at Makkah
 In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful. 
  The surah is Makkan and has 112 verses. It warns mankind of the Day of Judgment and emphasizes that Allah’s messengers are all human beings. The surah presents some of Allah’s  immense signs, cosmic and biological: the creation of the heavens and the earth, life and its dependence on water, which forms an integral part of all living creatures, as well as other signs.
  The story of Ibrahim (Abraham)—including his challenge of idolism and how he was saved from the fire—is elegantly and eloquently described. Also described are the narratives of Yunus (Jonah), Dawud (David) and Sulayman (Solomon) and the privileges bestowed on each. Other prophets are mentioned in short narratives alluding to their attributes. The surah ends with an invocation centering on Allah’s help for enduring with blasphemies uttered by the disbelievers against Allah, The All-Powerful and All-Mighty. 
 
   1. Mankind's Day of Judgment is approaching, yet they are veering away in heedlessness.
   2. No recent divine message or a warning comes to them from Allah their Lord but they listen to it playfully and laugh it to scorn.
   3. Their hearts are closed for revelation but open for mockery and amusement. Being wrongful of actions, they say in their secret counsel, “Is he, Muhammad, not human like yourselves? And so will you accede to the sorcery in his discourse when you have insight?”
   4. The Prophet said, “Allah my Lord knows all that is being discoursed in the heavens and on earth; He is The All-Hearing and The All-Knowing.”
   5. (The disbelievers went further and fared worse in their description of the Qur’an and of the Prophet.) They said, “Jumbled dreams, no, but he fabricated it, no, but he is a poet; he must present us with a (miraculous) sign like those the prophets of old were sent with.”
   6. In response to their insolence and defiance, Allah says: Miraculous signs were presented to towns before them, whom We caused to perish on account of their rejection and denial of divine truth; therefore, what chance is there that these disbelievers will believe in Allah?
   7. We never sent before you, O Prophet, but men chosen from among the town dwellers to whom We revealed the Message. Therefore, you disbelievers, may ask those who are well versed in the previous Scriptures (Jews and Christians) if indeed you do not know!
   8. Nor did We make bodies able to survive without consuming food, nor were they destined as immortals.
   9. And We fulfilled Our promise to them and delivered them out of danger together with whom We willed, and We made to perish the extravagant disbelievers (who held the prophets as liars, and disbelieved in their messages).
   10. And We have sent down to you people a Book (the Qur’an) serving as a reminder to you, and honor. Will you not understand?
   11. And think but this: How many towns whose inhabitants were wrongful of actions did We shatter and replace with other people!
   12. And when they sensed Our violence approaching, in vain they scampered for their lives to other places.
   13. In irony they were told, “Do not scamper but go back to your lustful life and to your dwellings; you may have much to answer for.”
   14. There and then they exclaimed thus: “Woe betide us; we were indeed unjust wrongdoers.”
   15. They kept crying their misfortune until We made them like a field of grain mown down.
   16. We never created the heavens and the earth and all that is in between just for playing.
   17. Had We purposed to have diversion, We would have had recourse to what We have in Our Heaven’s realm, if indeed We are performing that.
   18. But what befits Our Supremacy is to hurl falsehood with truth so that it expires; therefore, woe betide you for what you (insolently) ascribe to Allah.
   19. And to Allah alone belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and the angels serving in His realm of Heaven do not pride themselves for worshiping Him (and prostrating to Him in adoration), nor do they grow weary. 
   20. They glorify their Creator and extol His glorious attributes night and day, and they never lose vigor, nor do they flag. 
   21. Could it be that the disbelievers have taken earthly gods who can raise the dead (and restore them to life)?
   22. Indeed, if there be gods other than Allah (sharing His divine nature and attributes), the heavens and the earth would have been corrupted. Therefore, praise be to Allah and extolled are His glorious attributes, the sole Sovereign of the Supreme Throne. He is far above what they ascribe to Him.
   23. He is never questioned for whatever He performs (since He is the sole Sovereign); whereas they will have much to be questioned for (because they err due to their feebleness, ignorance, and lust).
   24. Or have they taken besides Allah other gods (which were indicated to them in previous Scriptures)? If so, say to them, O Muhammad, “Give us convincing proof to this effect. This Qur’an is the message to be followed by my fellows in faith, and those before me.” But, indeed, most of them fail to know the truth, and so they veer away.
   25. Nor did We send a messenger before you, Prophet, but We reveal to him with the truth clearly indicating that there is no god but Me (the Creator); therefore worship Me (with extreme devotion).
   26. And some disbelievers say, “Allah The All-Merciful has taken up a child.” Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! The angels are but honored and distinguished worshipers.
   27. Never do they speak before Him unless He permits or commands them to do so; similarly conditioned are their acts.
   28. He knows all that is before them and all that is behind them, and they never intercede on behalf of anyone except on behalf of those satisfied to Him (those to whom He intends to be gracious). The angels keep timorous of Him on account of the apprehensive veneration and the profound reverence due to Him.
   29. And should any of the angels or men claim godship besides Allah, then he is bound to Hell, for thus do We recompense the unjust wrongdoers.
   
   
   
   30. Do the disbelievers who disbelieve in Allah not see into the creation of the heavens and the earth? Both were one integrated mass and We split them asunder and We made every living being from water. Will the disbelievers not believe (and realize that there is a Creator)?
    Commentary:
  1) Life as we know it is a complex series of chemical reactions occurring in small jelly-like bags called cells. It is a fact that life started as one single cell (algae) with a remarkably complex system of interlinked chemical reactions that allow it to move, digest food, grow, and reproduce. 
  2) Life and dependence on water The cells that are the bricks from which the bodies of plants and animals are built, are principally carbon and water. Water allows the carbon atoms to dissolve and the carbon compounds to move around and react. Every living cell is three-quarters water, and so our solid bodies are, in fact, mainly composed of liquid.
Water constitutes 55 percent of body weight in the obese person and 65 percent in the thin. This means that in a thin person who weighs 60 kg, approximately 40 kg of his weight is water.
  3) Where is the water found?
  Two-thirds of it is found inside the cells  and one-third outside the cells, that is, in the tissues and the plasma (fluid of the blood). Water balance is controlled by several factors, and its depletion causes serious disorders ending in death.
     31. And We furnished the earth with firm stays (mountains) placed in a certain setting, fixed as with an anchor, to stabilize it (lest it should sway you from side to side or in all directions). And We furnished it with paths, roads, channels, routes by land and water and between mountains so that they may be guided (in their journeys between the different places).
    32. And We made the heaven with their spheres and regions which resemble a vast vault or canopy, being itself protected and well preserved. Yet they are veering away from the signs (stability, regularity, precision, immensity—and fail to ascribe them to their maker, Who is Allah).
   33. And it is He Who created the night and the day-time, the sun and the moon, each revolving in its own orbit.
   34. And never did We destine a human being before you, Prophet, to eternity (you are no exception). Is it, then, that when you die they will live eternally?
   35. Every self will taste death, and We tempt you people by evil and good (and by making Our grace abound in you to determine your true belief and inclination, and your way and course of acting). Then in the end will all of you be brought back to Us.
   36. And when the disbelievers see you, Prophet, they receive you with nothing but mockery and scorn and they say, “Is this the one who mentions (with blasphemes) your gods?” And when The All-Merciful is mentioned, their countenances speak disbelief against Him.
   37. Man has been created with the innate propensity to be hasty; I will exhibit to you My signs and My marvels (serving to demonstrate divine power and authority); therefore, do not ask Me to hasten them on.
   38. And yet the disbelievers ask the Muslims, “When will that promised punishment come to pass, if indeed you declare the truth sincerely?”
   39. If only these disbelievers (who deny Allah) knew that there will come a time when they will not be able to restrain the blazing fire from their faces nor from their backs, nor will they be afforded vindication!
   40. The Day of Resurrection will surprise them. Pale and dumb, they will stand confused and confounded, unable to turn it back, nor will they be granted respite.
   41. Messengers who were sent before you, Muhammad, were also mocked at; the disbelievers mocked them. In consequence, the scoffers were beset on all sides by the same things they had turned into mockery. 
   42. Say to them, Prophet, “Who can defend you by night and by day from The All-Merciful (and his torment)?” But they veer away from divine revelation, nor to Allah’s warning.
   43. Or have they gods besides Us who can defend them? They (the gods) are themselves unable to hold their own, nor can they vindicate themselves, nor do We protect them.
   44. We granted these people, together with their fathers, comfort and enjoyment and all that advantaged them of Our blessings in life as long as they lived. Do they not see that We reduce their territories and straiten their outlying borders (by rapid progress of Islam)? Is it, then, they who are the winners?
   45. Say to them, O Prophet, “I only warn you of the promised  punishment of which I have been informed by the revelation. But those who counsel deaf are oblivious of Allah’s warning.”
   46. And if afflicted with a gust of your Lord's torment, the disbelievers will say, “Woe betide us; we were indeed unjust wrongdoers.”
   
   47. And We set the equitable scales even on the Day of Resurrection. Accordingly, no self will ever be unjustly wronged in the least. Every deed, good or bad, will We present with precision, even if it be as light as a mustard seed. Enough are We as Reckoners.
   48. And We gave Musa and Harun the criterion (imparting the soundness of judgment in the choice of means and ends and in the choice of what is morally good, honest, and straightforward), serving as an illumination and enlightenment, besides being a divine light and a constant reminder of Allah to the pious,
   49. Who stand in apprehension of Allah, their Lord, albeit they cannot perceive Him by sight, and who think of the Day of Resurrection being timorous of the Final Hour of Judgment.
   50. And this Qur’an is a blessed Book that We have sent down to guide into all truth. Will you disbelievers reject and deny what is good and advantageous to attain and possess?
   51. Aforetime, We directed Ibrahim to employ forthrightness in forming conclusions, and We were knowledgeable of him (of his thoughts and of his innermost being).
   52. And remember, O Prophet, Ibrahim. He asked his father and his people, “What are these statues and images you regard with reverence and consecration?”
   53. They said, “We found our fathers revering them with acts and rites of worship.”
   
   54. “But you and your fathers,” said Ibrahim, “were evidently erroneous, indeed (in your system of faith and worship).”
   55. “Have you brought us the truth,” they asked, “or are you one of those who play and make this the object of a joke?”
   56. “But your Lord, Allah,” said Ibrahim, “is the Lord of the heavens and the earth Who generated them and brought them into existence, and to this effect I sincerely testify.”
   57. “And, by Allah,” said Ibrahim, “I will plot (to destroy) your idols after you have withdrawn and turned your backs.”
   58. And so he destroyed the idols into scraps, except their biggest, so that they might turn to it (for information).
   59. And when they returned, they exclaimed, “He who has done this to our gods is indeed an unjust wrongdoer.”
   60. Some of them said, “We heard a young man by the name of ‘Ibrahim calling them (names).”
   61. “Bring him here before the multitude,” they said, “so that they may witness with their own eyes the consequence (for Ibrahim has much to answer for).”
   62. And when he was brought over, they asked him, “Was it you, Ibrahim, who performed this to our gods?”
   63. “But it was their chief who performed it,” said Ibrahim “Ask them if they are able to pronounce (a word)!”
   64. And there, they returned to themselves saying, “You are indeed the unjust wrongdoers.”
   65. But, overturned to themselves, they said to him, “You knew very well that these idols do not pronounce (a word)!”
   66. “Do you worship besides Allah,” asked Ibrahim, “(objects) that neither profit you nor can do you harm?”
   67. “Fie on you and on those (objects) you worship besides Allah. Can you not consider (in forming conclusions)? (These idols do not deserve to be worshiped.)”
   68. “Nevertheless,” they said, “burn him and uphold your gods if indeed you intend to maintain our system of faith.”
   69.  We said, “O fire! Be cool and afford Ibrahim safety and peace.” 
   70. They thought of plotting against him, but We made them the losers (who lost the most).
   71. And We delivered him together with Lut (Lot), and delivered them to the land We had blessed, the land where many divine messages were revealed for all the worlds.
   72. And We bestowed on him Ishaq (Isaac), and Ya`qub (Jacob), each of whom We characterized by virtue and righteousness.
   73. And We made them leaders of faith guiding people into all truth as We commanded, and We revealed to them the charitable deeds of piety and keeping up of prayer and the giving of zakah. And they worshiped Us alone.
   74. And to Lut We imparted wise judgment, and knowledge; and We delivered him out of the town whose inhabitants had established the most evil deeds (and abnormal sexual practice of homosexuality). They were perverse people given to shameful deeds and immorality.
   75. And We admitted him to the domain of Our mercy. He was one of those characterized by righteousness (and vindication from Us).
   76. And Nuh (Noah) who called out to Us aforetime and We responded favorably to his invocation and rescued him and delivered him together with his family from the distressful agony.
   77. And We delivered him from the people who cried lies Our divine signs (and denied Our omnipotence and authority). They were woeful people, and in consequence We drowned them all.
   
   
   78. And recall, Prophet, Dawud (David) and Sulayman (Solomon),  who passed judgment* upon the owners of the sheep that escaped from their enclosure and strayed in people’s field. And We were witnesses of their Judgment.   
   79. But We made Sulayman understand the matter**, and to each one of them We brought  correct judgment and knowledge. And We subdued the mountains as well as the birds to join Dawud in praising Allah and in extolling His glorious attributes, and We have always been All-Powerful to perform what We will.
   80. And We taught Dawud the art of making armor for people’s protection to defend you from injury and to shield you from the violence exercised against each other. And now will you be thankful?
   81. And to Sulayman We subjected the wind raging and blowing tempestuously to flow at his command to the blessed land We had marked with grace***, and We were All-Knowing of everything. 
-----------------
* Dawud’s decision centered on compensation, that is, the sheep for the crop.
** The plaintiff makes use of the sheep until the defendant makes the necessary repairs and restores the field to the original state, then each takes back his property.
*** Sulayman was endowed with the power to tame evil with wisdom.
   
   
   82. Those among the jinn were also subdued to him to dive into the waters (after the treasures of pearls and corals), in addition to other jobs, and We were their Preservers.
   83. And recall, Prophet, Ayyub (Job), who called out to Allah, his Lord, for relief. He said, “O my Lord, I have suffered long-lasting adversity and You are the Most Merciful of all the merciful.” 
   84. And We responded favorably to his invocation and freed him from all adversity, and We compensated to him his family and the like of them, a mercy extended to him from Us and a Reminder for the worshipers.
   85. Also Isma`il, Idris, and Thal-Kifl, each of whom faced hardship and tribulations with patience and endurance.
   86. We admitted them in (the domain of) Our mercy, for they were of those characterized by righteousness.
   87. And Than-Nun (Yunus) (who met the opposition of the people to whom he was sent with impatience). Moved by anger, he left them thinking that We would not master and reprove him for such a behavior. (In the sea he was swallowed by the fish, wherein he was constrained.) In the depth of darkness he called (on Allah and invoked His mercy), saying, “O Allah, there is no god but You; glory be to You and extolled are Your glorious attributes. I have been unjustly wrongful of actions.”
   88. And there, We responded favorably to him and delivered him from the suffering and the distress, for thus do We deliver those who believe (admit their wrongdoing, and invoke Us).
   89. And recall Zakariyya (Zachariah) when he called out to his Lord and said, “O Allah my Lord, leave me not childless. (Give me a child not to inherit from me but to pursue the same line of action so that Your word may have a free course.) When it comes to inheritance, You are, indeed, The Most Charitable of Inheritors.”
   90. We responded favorably to him and bestowed on him Yahya (John), having made his wife righteous (and made her fruitful). These were people who vied swiftly in charitable deeds, and they invoked Us expressing their due affectionate devotion, keeping in awe of Us and hopeful of Our mercy, and they were indeed submissive to Us alone. 
   91. And recall Maryam (Mary) who attended to her private parts (guarded her chastity), and so We sent to her Our messenger (the angel Jibril—Gabriel) to breathe life into her of Our Spirit (in her womb). And We made her and her son `Isa (Jesus) (of Our omnipotence and authority) a sign to the worlds.
   92. This nation of yours is one nation. (This is the religion eminently professed by all the previous prophets, the one and only system of faith and worship established by Allah.) And I am Allah your Lord; therefore, worship Me alone (and do not associate other deities with Me). 
   93. Yet people, differed among themselves about their Command, but all will (inevitably) return to Us.
   94. Therefore, he who does righteous deeds and is a believer while his heart believes in Allah and His religion, will be the recipient of Our mercy. His deeds and his endeavor will not be disavowed nor denied, and We record his endeavor to his advantage.
   95. The punishment We inflict on any town to cause it to perish is certainly not the end, nor does it mean that they will not rise again. They will rise (they have much to answer for and pay for their sinful deeds in the Hereafter).
   96. And when the gates of evil are wide open, and Ya'juj and Ma'juj (Gog and Magog) press down from every slope (overcoming all barriers and ramparts), 
   97. And the promised Event draws near, there and then will the disbelievers’ eyes be wide open glazing fixedly in horror, and they say, “Woe betide us; we were not only heedless of this event, but we were also unjust wrongdoers.”
   98. And there they are told, “You and those you worshiped besides Allah are the gravel of Hell, to which you will now herd.
   99. “Had these objects of worship you associated with Allah been gods who deserved to be worshiped, they would not have herded with you therein. And now all and each of you will be eternally therein.”
   100. There will they pant, emitting with difficulty a deep breath and drawing with more difficulty a long breath, groaning (and the painful emotion compounded of loathing and fear), and the feeling excited by fright will deafen their ears so that they cannot hear.
   101. But those in whom Allah’s fair grace has abounded beforehand are those who will be kept far away from Hell and its torture.
   102. They do not hear the sharp continual hissing sound its flames emit; to the contrary, they will be eternally enjoying what they craved for. 
   103. Nor will they be disturbed, grieved, or shocked by the overwhelming alarm of the Day of Resurrection, and they will be received with a hearty welcome by the angels who say to them, “This is your happy day, the day you were promised.”
   104. This is the Day when We fold the heavens the way the scribe rolls together the books, so that as We effected the first creation so will We effect re-creation—a promise that We are All-Powerful to fulfill.  
   105. And We decreed and wrote in the Zubur (the Book revealed to Dawud; Psalms) after the Remembrance (the Tawrah [the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]), that the earth will be inherited by My righteous worshipers.
   106. This proclamation is made evident in this Book (the Qur’an) and stands as a proclamation to people who are well prepared to worship Allah alone.
   107. We did not send you, Prophet, except as a mercy (that Allah has extended) to all the worlds.
   108. Therefore, say to the people, “What is revealed to me is that your God, Allah, is One God; will you then be Muslims?”
   109. And should they turn their backs, then say to them, “I have done my duty and I have proclaimed to you all alike the word of Allah and notified you of the consequences. And I just do not know whether what you have been promised, good or bad, is close at hand or far and distant.
   110. “Allah knows what is avowed aloud and openly, and He knows all that you do out of sight and keep back.
   111. “Nor do I know the reason for the respite granted to you people. It may be a temptation to test your true belief and inclination, or to give you enough enjoyment up to a predetermined point of time (in accordance with His Wisdom).”
   112. And invoke Allah, Prophet, to give judgment upon your matter, thus, “Your Judgment, my Lord, is the truth. Judge, my Lord, between me and those who rejected Your Word.” And say to them, “And Allah The All-Merciful is He Whose present help is sought to endure with whatever you utter.”


