SURAH 22
AL-HAJJ
The Pilgrimage
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed at Madinah, except verses 52 through 55. There are 78 verses in the surah.
    The surah starts by a call to regard Allah with reverence and awe, and reminds people of the astounding Day of Resurrection and the intense horror it excites. It then shows the characteristics of those people who argue unjustly and in ignorance. This is followed by giving evidence of the resurrection by the token of the development of the creation of man and the growth of plants. The surah then deals with the consequences of arguing about Allah by want of guidance. It then deals with pilgrimage and holding rites in esteem. After this Allah allows believers to fight in defense of their religion and themselves. This is followed by comforting the Messenger for what his people inflicted on him, by mentioning the injustice and persecution that fell on messengers before him. The surah also includes verses containing signs of the omnipotence and oneness of Allah Almighty. It also defines the mission of the messengers as conveying warning, not compulsion. At the end of the surah there is defiance of those who associate other deities with Allah and holding the disbelievers in ridicule, stating that they cannot create even the feeblest of creatures, namely flies, and that if flies ravish something, people cannot get it back from them. The surah then calls Muslims to perform prayers, give zakah (alms), worship Allah truly, and strive in the path of Allah. It calls upon Muslims to abide by the religion of their forefather Ibrahim (Abraham), father of Isma`il (Ishmael).
 
    1. O you people, regard Allah your Creator with reverence and piety. The quake of the universe at the Final Hour on the Day of Judgment is indeed tremendous and excites intense horror.
    2. The day you see it, every nursing mother distracted from her suckling child and every pregnant female will lay down what she conceived, and you see the people drunken while not intoxicated. But it is actually the reflection of Allah’s severe torment.
    3. Yet among the people is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge and follows every insurgent devil (and follows those with characteristics befitting Satan).
    4. Satan has been designated as evil itself, and he who takes him as his patron guardian will be misled and be lost in the maze of error and will be led to where he suffers the torment of the blazing Fire (laid upon the damned).
    
    5. O you mankind, if you are in suspicion of resurrection, We created you from dust, then We made you evolve from a seed (a constituent part of emitted fluid), then from a clinging organism, then from a bolus-like mass of coherent body of matter partly shaped and partly not yet shaped, to realize Allah’s omnipotence. And We repose in the wombs what We will for a determined period of time. We then disburden the wombs of you as a newborn baby, then you grow to maturity. And among you is he who is caused to die and also he who is carried through to a decrepit age that he loses the wits that were once about him and he loses remembrance of knowledge he formerly mastered. And you see the earth torpid and barren, and when We send rain down and it shakes, it thrives, flourishes, and vegetates delightful pairs of vegetal growths. 
    6. This is by reason of Allah’s attributes. He is The Truth, and it is He Who raises the dead and restores them to life, and He is indeed All-Determiner over all things (and able to accomplish what He wills).
    7. He authoritatively states that the Final Hour (Day of Judgment) is above suspicion (and an absolute certainty), and that Allah will resurrect those in the graves (for reckoning and reward or punishment).
    8. Yet among the people is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge and by want of guidance and by want of a Book imparting Divine enlightment.
    9. You see him bending his side in disdain (and slipping aside from righteousness and piety in order to mislead the people from the way of Allah. He will suffer shame, dishonor, and disgrace in the present world, and We will make him taste the blazes of burning in the Day of Resurrection.
    10. “This is in consequence,” he is told, “of what your wrongful hands have forwarded, and Allah is not He Who does not observe the principles of justice when He judges His bondmen.”
    11. And among mankind is someone who worships Allah, standing on the border. If all goes well with any of them and he makes worldly gains, he is gratified and he is composed. And should he be afflicted by temptation; he turns over on his face and turns renegade so that he loses both worlds, here and the hereafter. And this is indeed the utmost loss.
    12. He erroneously invokes besides Allah objects unable to harm him if he does not worship them, nor profit him if he worships them, and this is erring far away.
    13. He invokes an object which would sooner hurt him than profit him. How bad is the patron and how bad is the consort!
    14. Allah does, indeed, cause those whose hearts have believed and done righteous deeds to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow, and Allah does what He wills.
    15. He who surmises that Allah will not help (His Prophet in this world and the Hereafter) may attach or stretch a rope heavenward to hang himself and cut it off to see (if this stops the Prophet’s help from Heaven) whether such plotting will annul his rage! 
    
    16. Thus did We send down the Qur’an, embodying evident signs (guiding out of darkness into enlightenment). Allah does, indeed, guide whom He wills.
    17. Those who have believed (and acknowledged the Prophet Muhammad) and those who believed in the prophets of the past, and those who profess Judaism, the Sabi'in (Sabeans), and the Nasara (Christians), as well as the Magians and those who associated other deities with Allah, Allah will distinctly judge between them on the Day of Judgment; He (is the All-Powerful Who) witnesses all actions and all things.
    18. Do you not see (you who are oblivious of Allah’s omnipotence), that to Allah all creatures in the heavens and on earth prostrate in praise and worship, and so do the sun and the moon, the stars and the mountains, the trees and the beasts, and a great many among mankind. Likewise, a great many have deserved torment. And he whom Allah degrades—no one will be able to restore his honor. Allah performs what He wills*.
    19. There you people have an acquirement to comprehend: two adversaries who argued, one in favor and the other against Allah their Lord. As for those who have disbelieved, their measures have been taken for fitting them with an exclusive attire— vesture made of fire, and on their heads will be poured scalding water (bubbling over in agitation),
---------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    
    20. Scalding water diffusing itself throughout to melt what is in their bellies and their skins.
    21. They will be restricted in solitary confinement, with hooked rods (within cells vaulted with iron).
    22. As often as they (seek relief they) try to get out from there, only to be returned and be told, “Taste the torment of burning in the Fire (as a punishment for your disbelieving).”
    23. As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, Allah admits them to Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will be ornamented with golden and pearled bracelets and vested in silken attire.
    24. They are guided to use gracious words in their speech, and they were graced with Allah’s guidance to His path, the path of The All-Praiseworthy.
    25. Indeed, those disbelievers who disbelieve in Allah and His prophets and bar from the way of Allah and the Inviolable mosque, (will have much to answer for). We made the Mosque a refuge at the disposal of all people alike, the consecrating therein and the "visitors". He among them whose intention is irreverence and profanity, We will make him taste the torment laid upon the damned.
    26. We had located to Ibrahim (Abraham) the site where he would build the House and We instructed him thus: “Do not associate other deities with Me, and purify My House from defilements (idols and the like, placed by the pagans), and impart to it real sacredness, and make it ceremonially clean for those who go round it in procession and for those who perform the act of worship standing and for those who bow down in supplication and prostrate in acknowledgement of Allah’s omnipotence and authority.
    27. “And proclaim pilgrimage to the mankind; they will come to you on foot and mounted upon the back of every lean and exhausted beast of burden from every ravine (and deep and distant places).
    28. “They will be eager to respond to your call to observe events considered a source of knowledge, and to participate in the intercourse of life. And they will extol and proclaim the glorious attributes of Allah throughout the predetermined days in appreciation of Allah’s blessings, and be impelled to the feeling of gratefulness for what He provided for them of camels, cows, and cattle for sacrifice, and to fulfill what He has enjoined. Eat therefrom if you may, and feed the indigent and the needy. 
    29. “Thereafter they will be permitted to remove the unwanted biological accumulations on their bodies (hair, dirt, nails) and to fulfill their promises and pay their vows—if any—and again go round the Ancient House in procession.”
    30. So be it, and he who honors what Allah has ordained to be observed will have accomplished what is laudable and acceptable to his Lord. (And in that connection), the flesh of cattle has been rendered lawful to you (camels, cows, sheep and the like animals reared for food) except those designated and recited to you as forbidden. And avoid abominating and sacrificing animals under the immolation to idols, and avoid telling a forgery (as well as the intentional assertion of what is false).
    31. Sincerely maintain unswerving the precepts of Allah’s system of faith and worship authoritatively established by Him, and do not associate other deities with Him. And he who associates other deities with Him will stand exact similitude of someone who has fallen from heaven and been snatched by the birds of prey or been swept away by a storm in its fury to a distant place.
    32. And he who honors Allah’s waymarks (acts and rites and turns his thoughts upon the duties owed to Him will have won Allah’s affection), for honoring Allah’s rites is (an endearment) of the hearts reflective of piety.
    33. You advantage yourselves of them up to a determined point of time; then they are taken to where they belong, the ancient Ancient House, where they are sacrificed, and pilgrimage will have had all its rites.
    34. And to every nation did We authoritatively determine certain rites of sacrifice so that they may use the sacred event to commemorate Allah’s Name and perform the sacrifice under His Name as a form of warm feeling of good will and gratitude for what He has provided for them of livestock reared for food. Indeed, your Allah is One and only. Therefore, surrender your will to His will in Islam. Meanwhile, announce, O Prophet, joyful tidings to those who humble themselves and entertain the profound reverence due to Allah;
    35. Who when Allah is mentioned, lift to Allah their hearts are tremulous with veneration at the mention and the thought of Him; who exercise patience in the face of misfortunes or calamities (in peace and in war); and who observe the act of prayer and spend in benevolence of advantages We have provided them.
    36. And We make lawful for you the camels and cows, as the waymarks of Allah, to use in the event of your oblation of thanksgiving and in your offering. They serve as a store from which you obtain advantages in plenty. Therefore, pronounce Allah’s Name on them as they are lined up, slaughtered, and laid on their sides. You may eat from them and feed him who is content and satisfied in mind despite poverty, as well as him who is needy and circumstances compel him to beg. Thus did We make these animals subservient for you that you may, it is hoped, impel yourselves to the feeling of gratitude and thank (Me).
    37. It is not their flesh nor their blood that reaches Allah. It is only the piety on your part, the obedience, and the faithfulness to the duties owed to Him. We made them subservient to you so that you may magnify Allah and extol His glorious attributes in return for His guiding you to all truth. Meanwhile, Prophet, proclaim joyful tidings to those whose deeds are imprinted with fairness and piety.
    38. Indeed, Allah defends those whose hearts have believed; whereas He simply does not love the dishonest, the unfaithful, and the treacherous given to infidelity and disbelief.
    39. Those who have been unjustly attacked by the disbelievers who waged war against them for their belief in Allah are permitted to fight in defense of the wrong inflicted on them; Allah is indeed All-Powerful to give them victory.
    40. The Muslims were unjustly driven out from their homes for no reason other than saying, “Our Allah is the Lord of the whole and of all in all.” And were it not that Allah represses some people by others, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques where He is much remembered and His glorious Name extolled would have been demolished. But Allah does indeed vindicate those whose purpose is to serve Him and vindicate His cause; Allah is indeed All-Powerful and All-Mighty.
    41. These are they who will not neglect religious observances (the act of prayer, zakah, enjoining what is just and right, and forbidding what is evil) when given power and authority in the land. The ultimate decision of all affairs rests with Allah, here and in the hereafter.
    42. Should the disbelievers accuse you, Prophet, of lying, so did those before you, the people of Nuh (Noah), of `Ad and of Thamud. They charged their prophets with lies.
    43. So did the people of Ibrahim (Abraham) and those of Lut (Lot).
    44. And companions of Madyan accused Shu`aib, and Pharaoh and his people accused Musa (Moses) of lies. In consequence I reprieved them to a predetermined point of time, then I took them away (from a position of prosperity and power and brought them to ruin). And how unbearable was their disclaiming (and how intolerable was the fitting retribution)!
    45. Many were the towns We destroyed with their wrongful unjust inhabitants so that they stood devastated but of dilapidated trellises over hills of ruin, and the wells and the spacious and highly decorated palaces neglected, empty, and abandoned!
    46. Have these disbelievers not traveled through the land and employed hearts with which they consider and ears with which they hear? Indeed, it is not the eyes of the body that go blind but the hearts in the breasts.
    47. And the disbelievers ask you, Muhammad, to hasten on the promised torment. But never will Allah fail His promise. And a day with your Lord is as a thousand years of your reckoning. 
    48. And how many towns of unjust inhabitants did I reprieve, then I took them down (from a position of prosperity and power and brought them to ruin). And to Me will in the end be the Destiny.
    49. Say to mankind, “O you mankind, I have been sent to you all as an evident warning.”
    50. Consequently, those who believe in Allah and do righteous deeds will be mercifully forgiven and be graced with honorable provision (in this world and in the hereafter).
    51. Whereas those who strive to oppose and defy Our authoritative and divine signs will be the companions of Hell-Fire forever.
    52. Nor did We send before you, Prophet, a messenger or a prophet but when he covets, Ash-Shaytan cast in his coveting. But there and then does Allah abrogate what Ash-Shaytan casts. And He clearly confirms His signs. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
    53. Allah makes the incitement instigated by satan as a temptation for those in whose hearts reigns sickness and those who are hard-hearted. And the unjust wrongdoers are in disagreement (producing extreme contention and discord).
    54. And those who are given knowledge know that this Qur’an is the truth from Allah your Lord, and in consequence they believe in it, and their hearts venerate to it. And Allah guides those who believe in Him to the straight path of righteousness. 
    55. Nevertheless, the disbelievers continue to be wrangling of the divine nature of the Qur’an until the sudden encounter with the Hour, or until the torment of sterile Day comes.
    56. There and then will the sovereign authority and the right of controlling be exclusively that of Allah, Who gives judgment to confer the Gardens of bliss on those who have believed and who have done righteous deeds.
    57. Allah will requite the disbelievers who defiantly cried lies to Allah’s divine and authoritative signs with the degrading torment.
    58. And those who emigrated to serve Allah’s purpose and strive in His cause, whether killed in action or died of natural causes, will be honored. Allah will provide them with a fair provision, for He is indeed the most Charitable of providers.
    59. He will admit them into favor and grant them an honorable entry  actuating them with satisfaction. Allah is indeed All-Knowing and Ever-Forbearing (toward His bondmen).
    
    60. And he who punishes with the like of that with which he was punished, and should the plaintiff be inequitably offended further by the offender, then will Allah help the former against the latter, and give him victory over him. Allah is indeed ever All-Clement and All-Forgiving.
    61. This is, for Allah inserts the night into the day and inserts the day into the night. And Allah is indeed Ever-Hearing and All-Seeing.
    62. Allah is The Truth, and any other object of worship they invoke besides Him is falsehood and untruth. Allah is indeed The Ever-Exalted, The Ever-Great.
    63. Do you not see that Allah sends down from the heaven rain water and makes it instrumental (in springing up vegetation and) rendering the land verdant? Allah is, indeed, Ever-Kind, Ever-Cognizant. 
    64. To Him belong all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth, and Allah is indeed Ever-Affluent, Ever-Praiseworthy.
    65. Do you not see that Allah has subjected to you all that is on earth, and the ships move in the sea by His invisible command (producing their buoyancy and their motion)? And He sustains and supports the heaven and keeps it from falling on the earth unless it be permitted by Him (meteorites, shooting stars, fire balls). Indeed, Allah displays kindness to mankind, those who serve Him and those who do not. He is Ever-Compassionate, Ever-Merciful.
    
    66. And it is He Who (brought you into existence and) gave you life. Then He occasions your death, and at the predetermined point of time your resurrection. Man is indeed a disbeliever.
    67. To every nation did We prescribe certain rites and articles of faith and the order of celebrating religious services, and it was incumbent on them to follow (until the system was modified or replaced by a new system suitable for the time at the hands of another messenger). Therefore, Prophet, do not let them contend with you upon the question, and keep calling for Allah’s acceptable system of faith and worship. You are indeed on a straight guidance, the path of righteousness, the path of Allah.
    68. And should the disbelievers dispute with you, then say to them, “Allah knows best what you do.
    69. “Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection in all matters for which you are ready to differ.” 
    70. Do you not know that Allah is All-Knowing of all that is in heaven and on earth? It is all on record in a Book, and this is quite easy for Allah to do.
    71. Yet they worship besides Allah objects for which He has not sent down authority and of which they have no knowledge. And the unjust wrongdoers will have no vindicator to afford them help.
    72. And to their misfortune when Our evident signs (revelations) are recited to them, you instantly recognize maleficence in the faces of the disbelievers. They are almost ready to attack with hostile action and words to those who recite to them Our revelations. Say to them, Prophet, “If these divine revelations are distasteful to you, shall I tell you of what will be far worse and more distasteful to you? It is the fire, which Allah has promised to those disbelievers who denied Him. And how evil is the Destiny!”
    73. O you mankind, an allegorical representation is introduced to describe a subject under the guise of some other subject of aptly suggestive resemblance. Thus, those whom you invoke besides Allah (idols or human), will not be able to create a fly even if they get together (and combine their efforts). And if a fly should rob anything out of their hands or out of their environ, never will they be able to rescue (reclaim) it. How weak is the seeker who is defeated by a fly and the creature sought (the fly)! 
    74. The Makkan disbelievers did not estimate Allah with the true estimates  asserted as His own. Indeed, Allah is All-Powerful and All-Mighty.
    75. Allah elects from the angels messengers as He chooses from mankind. He is, indeed, All-Hearing and All-Seeing.
    76. He knows what is before them and it is behind them, and to Him, the Ultimate Authority, are committed and submitted all matters (and all affairs for consideration, decision, and execution here and in the hereafter).
    77. O you who believe, bow down and prostrate yourselves (in reverence and submission to Allah), and worship (Allah) your Lord, and do righteous and charitable deeds so that you may prosper.
    78. And strive in the cause of Allah and make His purpose the heart of your purpose. He has selected you. He did not intend to put you in difficulty nor to create for you restrictions in the religion and worship He has chosen for you, the same creed followed by your father Ibrahim. It is Allah Who gave you people the descriptive and distinctive appellation “Muslims” in previous Scriptures as well as in this Book (the Qur’an) so that the Messenger Muhammad would be a witness of your actions and you come to be witnesses of mankind's actions which interpret their thoughts and characterize their rival systems. Therefore, engage in the act of prayer, give the zakah, and adhere to Allah, and see that you be under His tutelage. He is your Patronizer, and how ultimate in excellence is The Patronizer and The Vindicator!


