SURAH 23
AL-MU’MINUN
The Believers
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This is a Makkan surah of 118 verses. It starts with ascribing prosperity to the believers, followed by a statement of their attributes. Then the surah mentions the origin of man’s creation and the development of this creation and its successive stages, as well as some signs of the omnipotence of Allah. This is followed by stories of prophets, signifying the oneness of messages and the unity of man, even though people may be believers or disbelievers. The surah  then describes one who seeks guidance as well as one who is misguided. It expounds the attitude of the polytheists towards the Prophet, then it moves to showing the signs of Allah’s omnipotence as manifested in the creation of man. Allah poses questions to people so that they may answer Him by means of their innate nature, in a way that ascertains His existence and ascribes Godhood to Him. Then the surah  shows the conditions of people on the Day of Resurrection and that they will be justly reckoned. The surah ends with a statement of Allah’s sovereignty and calls the attention of His Messenger to ask for forgiveness and mercy from The Merciful. 
 
    1. Prosperous has been the outcome achieved by those who believe in Allah (and in what His messengers conveyed),
    2. Who habitually exercise submission when standing before Allah in prayer,
    3. Who veer away from small or idle talk, gossip, and slander,
    4. Who perform the religious duty of giving zakah (with the sympathetic feeling toward the poor and their due),
    5. Who preserve their sexual morality (and refrain from unlawful sexual intercourse, sexual perversion, and sexual abuse)—
    6. But absolved are they to satisfy their instinctive sexual desire with those (spouses) to whom they are united in matrimony or with those whom they choose to marry from those on hand, and there they incur no blame;
    7. And those who do not confine their sexual activity within these limitations are the aggressors, (who will have violated and disregarded the set limits instituted by Allah)—
    8. Who are trustworthy, an attribute including fulfillment of the confidence reposed in them when entrusted with anything, meeting their obligation or responsibility, honoring the legal ownership of property vested in them to hold or use for the benefit of others, keeping their covenant.
    9. And those who faithfully observe their prayers.
    10. Such persons are the inheritors of Allah’s mercy and blessings here and on the Day of Resurrection.
    11. They will inherit Al-Firdaws (Paradise) in which they enjoy the unsurpassed beauty and supreme bliss for eternity.
    12. We brought man to being by special creation from an extraction of wet and soft earth matter.
    13. Then We made him evolve from a nutfah amshaj (union of male and female seeds), the zygote that We embedded in the depth of a safe and secure reposing.
    14. Then We created the nutfah (sperm-drop) into a clinging organism. Then We created the clinging organism into a bolus-like chewed-up mass of coherent body of matter. Then We created the bolus-like chewed-up mass into bones, and We dressed the bones flesh. Out of this We brought it forth as a different creation. So, blessed be Allah, The Fairest of creators. 
    15. Thereafter, all of you (sons of Adam) will inevitably come upon the encounter with death (and be deposited in the graves).
    16. And the Day of Resurrection all of you will be made to rise again for reckoning.
    17. And We created seven (heavenly) roads that hang high above your heads, and We are not heedless of Our creation. It is We Who maintain them in existence and in order.
     18. And We sent down from heaven rain water in due measure inside the land and on its surface—enough to dwell in the earth (and to effect the necessary equilibrium between the opposing forces of land and water, between cloud formation and fresh water in rivers and lakes maintaining life, between the clouds and the water deposited underground), and We are certainly able to take it away.
    19. We made it instrumental in springing up for you gardens and orchards of date palms and vines supplying you with abundance of fruits and food,
    20. In addition to the tree (olive) springing out of Mount Sinai, growing with oil and nutrition seasoning for eaters.
    21. And you have in cattle a divine lesson of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, a sign for you to ponder. From their bellies We supply you with a pure drink (milk) and other great benefits you advantage yourselves of, and of them you eat.
    22. And on their backs and on board ships you are carried from one place to another (thus creating for you means of transportation on the land and at sea, by means of which you communicate). 
    23. (Yet people have always been averse to Allah’s divine message, past and present, and this is exampled in the people of Nuh (Noah) and in those who followed.) We sent Nuh with Our divine message to his people. He said to them, “My people, worship Allah. You have no god but Him. Will you entertain the profound piety due to Him?”
    24. But the disbelieving chiefs among his people exclaimed, “He is only a human like yourselves. He simply wishes to have superiority over you. And had Allah willed, He would have sent down angels to serve as His messengers. We never heard of this by our forefathers.”
    25. “Indeed,” they continued, “he is but a madman. Watch him for some time with patience.”
    26. There did Nuh invoke Allah for His aid: “O Allah my Lord, give me victory over them; they have accused me of lies.”
    27. There and then, We revealed to him: “Construct the ark under Our Eyes and Revelation. And when Our command comes to pass and you see the water bubbling up and rising in billows (and erupting through the earth’s surface inundating the land), you just dispatch with you on board ship a pair (a male and a female) of every kind together with your family, except those against whom Allah has already passed His word. And do not address Me, Nuh, for those unjust wrongdoers; they will most certainly be drowned.
    28. “And when you and those in your company have leveled yourselves (express your gratitude to Allah in words thus): ‘Praise be to Allah Who has delivered us from those unjust wrongdoers.’
    29. “And pray, ‘O Allah my Lord, help me disembark encompassed by Your blessing, and let the place where I make abode be a place of blessing. You are the Most Charitable Host Who can accommodate whom You will to the best.’”
    30. These are signs signalizing Allah’s omnipotence and authority, and We have always been trying people for their true belief.
    31. After Nuh, We brought about another generation (the `Ad).  
    32. And We sent to them a messenger from among them (to convey to them Our divine message). He said to them, “Worship Allah alone; you have no god other than Him. Will you not then entertain the profound piety due to Him?”
    33. The chiefs among his people who disbelieved in Allah and cried lies to the Meeting of the Hereafter, and We made them luxurious in this life, said, “But he is only a mortal like yourselves. He eats the same food you eat and drinks of what you drink.”
    34. “And,” they added, “should you follow a mortal like yourselves (your hopes will be doomed to disappointment) and you will be great losers.”
    35. “Does he promise you,” they said, “that after you have died and been reduced to dust and (degenerate) bones, you will be brought out and will be resurrected and restored to life?
    36. “How inconceivable and how far-fetched is what you are promised!”
    37. “In fact,” they said, “there is only this present life. We die (and so will our posterity); they will also die and their posterity will live until time does away with life, and never will we be raised again.”
    38. “He is simply a man,” they continued, “who fabricates falsehood against Allah, and never will we believe him.”
    39. And there he prayed, “O Allah my Lord, give me victory over them; they have accused me of lies.”
    40. “Rest assured,” said Allah to His messenger, “their defiance and their pride are short-lived and soon enough they will be really remorseful (when the torment befalls them).”
    41. And there in due time they were justly overtaken by a direful shout from heaven, stirring up a merciless blast reducing them to an assemblage of stubble; and so away with the unjust wrongdoers.
    42. And We raised after them other generations, such as the people of Salih, Lut (Lot), and Shu`ayb.
    43. No people or nation can outstrip their set period of time, nor can they postdate it either.
    44. Thereafter, We sent Our messengers, one succeeding another, and whenever a messenger presented himself to his people, he was accused of lies. In consequence, We punished them successively, following one  upon another, and We made them the talk of all towns. Away with people disbelieved in Allah!
    45. Then We sent Musa (Moses) and his brother Harun (Aaron) with divine signs and divine power and authority.
    46. We sent them to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they prided themselves on their arrogance and discourteous refusal, and displayed arrogance and exalted themselves.
    47. And they said to them in arrogance and denial, “Shall we submit to two mortals like ourselves while their people are reduced by us to a worshipping us?”
    48. And they accused them of lies, and consequently they were among those who perished by drowning.
    49. And We gave Musa the Book of the Tawrah so that his people (the Israelites) might be guided to the truth.
    50. And We made the son of Maryam (Mary)—`Isa (Jesus)—and his mother a sign of Our omnipotence and authority, and We provided them with an abode on a high land, affording them security and reposing, and beneath which flowed a spring.
    51. We said to each and all Our messengers, “O you messengers, exhort your people to eat of all that has been rendered lawful and all that is worthy, good, and wholesome, and imprint your deeds with righteousness, for I am All-Knowing of all that you do.
    52. “All of you are but one nation and you constitute one nation. Allah’s message is one. His system of faith and worship is one and I am Allah your Lord. Therefore, I exact from you (obedience and that you entertain the) profound piety due to Me.”
    53. Yet the people were divided among themselves into denominations and set at variance, and the ties among them were severed. Instead of unity in feeling, action, and purpose, each party exulting with his own views.
    54. Therefore, leave them, Muhammad, for the time being in the depth of error and perplexity; there is a fitting point of time for every event.
    55. Do the disbelievers think that because We bestow on them wealth and children,
    56. We are pleased with their perverted adoration and by consequence hasten on to make all Our grace deservedly abound in them? To the contrary, they are not aware that We give them enough rope to allow them free scope of action to commit themselves.
    57. Conversely, those who are inspired with timorous dread and fear of Allah their Lord (being careful for the profound reverence due to Him),
    58. Who sincerely believe their Creator’s revelations and His authoritative divine signs,
    59. Who do not associate any deities with Allah, their Lord,
    60. Who give in benevolence, no matter what, lifting to Allah their inward sight and laying to their tremulous hearts their fate on the Day of Judgment—
    61. These are they who strive to imprint their deeds with piety and are outstrippers (to gain more of Allah’s mercy and blessings).
    62. And on no self do We impose more than its capacity, and We have a Book in which all records of deeds are kept, and it simply speaks the Truth and no one will ever be unjustly wronged.
    63. But the disbelievers are oblivious of all this, and their hearts are sunk in perplexity about this, and besides that they engage themselves in work of irreverence (and of evil that is wrought by want of thought).
    64. And when We lay hold of the affluent among them who live in luxury, they implore and invoke Allah for relief.
    65. “Do not implore for help today or relief in the hereafter, for no help nor vindication will you expect from Us ever.
    66. “My revelations were recited to you and My evident signs were presented to you, but you always shunned the truth and turned the other way on your heels.
    67. “Ostentatiously exhibiting pride and inordinate self-esteem, forsaking the Qur’an and seeking entertainment.”
    68. Do these disbelievers not ponder over the Saying of Allah to realize that it is the truth? Or have they received a message not conveyed to their forefathers?
    69. Or do they not recognize their Messenger Muhammad who is one of them and, therefore, do not avow him (as one of their own out of injustice and envy)?
    70. Or do they accuse him of being mad? Indeed, he is a person steadfast in adherence to his Creator and His cause, and he brought these pagans the very truth guiding to all truth. But how hateful to most of them is the truth!
    71. Indeed, if the truth were to accord with their prejudices, the heavens and the earth and all created beings, the animate and the inanimate, therein would have broken into corruption and fallen into disorder. But We have sent them the truth that refers them directly to Allah. Yet they evade the truth. They are averse to admitting the truth and they veer away from all that reminds them of the duties owed to Allah.
    72. Or do you ask them, Prophet, to pay you a tribute for the divine service you render? Never! and they do know that. And they had better realize that the tribute granted by Allah your Lord is more charitable than what is given by all others, for He is the best Provider Who makes provision for the needs of all.
    73. Besides, you are indeed the best guide who leads them to righteousness, the straight path (of Allah).
    74. But those who do not believe in the hereafter are eschewing from the path of righteousness.
    75. And if We had extended to them Our mercy and blessings and lifted off their adversity, they would insist on blundering in their inordinance.
    76. In fact, We formerly inflicted them with torment and penalized them for disobedience and transgression that they may repent. But they never yielded nor humbled themselves to Allah their Lord, nor did they entreat Him for mercy, nor did they supplicate of Him what He would have mercifully given.
    77. They persisted in wrongdoing until We (closed the gate of mercy in their faces and) opened the gate of torment. But on the contrary, they only nursed dumbfounded despair.
    78. But Allah is He Who blessed you, mankind, with the faculties of hearing and sight, and He implanted in you the heart. Yet how little you give thanks (or express gratitude in acknowledgment of His favors)!
    79. And it is He Who propagated you on earth (and made you increase in number by natural generation), and in the end all of you will be mustered before Him.
    80. And it is He who gives life and causes animate existence, and it is He Who occasions death and deprives of animate existence. And to Him is related the natural phenomena of the variations in duration and the constant alternation and succession symbolic of the night and the day and their contingent physical phenomena. Will you not, therefore, consider?
    81. No. They said the like of what the earliest people said.
    82. They say, “Is it (at all conceivable) that when we die and are reduced to dust and bones we could be resurrected?”
    83. “We had been promised that before,” they add, “and so had been our fathers. This is nothing but the myths of the earliest people.”
    84. Ask them, Muhammad, “To whom belong the earth and all (the animate and the inanimate created) beings thereon? Tell me if you know!”
    85. They will say, “To Allah.” Then say to them, “Can you then not remember? (Why do you associate with Me other deities? Do not you realize that He Who owns this has the right to be worshiped alone?)”
    86. Ask them, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Magnificent Throne?”
    87. Again they will say, “Allah.” Then say to them, “Will you not, then, entertain the profound piety due to Him?”
    88. Ask them, “Who is He Who has the gripping hands of nature and the controlling power over the universe and Who protects the whole and all in all but needs no protection? Tell me if you know.”
    89. Again they will say, “Allah.” Then say to them, “Then how can you be bewitched?”
    90. But We have constantly presented to them the truth (at the hands of all the messengers), but they persistently are liars.
    91. Never did Allah take or beget a son, nor did He share His sovereignty with any god; for if He did, then each god would have had a kingdom of his own independent of the others, and each would have exalted himself above the others. Extolled are His glorious attributes! (He is infinitely far beyond all that they falsely attribute to Him.)
    92. He is The All-Knowing of all the unseen, the hidden, and the unknown (and of all that is perceived by sight and all that is evidently known). Praise be to Him and exalted are His glorious attributes. He is infinitely far beyond all those whom they associate with Him.
    93. And pray, O Prophet, “O Allah my Lord, if You have destined me to see the devastating punishment that they have been promised,
    94. “Then, I pray and beseech You, O Allah my Lord, not to make  me the unjust.”
    95. However, We are certainly able to show you, Muhammad, the scene of the promised (devastating punishment).
    96. Repel what odious with what is fairest in words and in action. We are All-Knowing of the falsehood they describe and attribute to you and your call (and We will punish them for it).
    97. And pray, “To You, Allah my Lord, do I commit myself counter to the satanic promptings.”
    98. “And to You, Allah my Lord, do I commit myself counter to their presence near me (so that all my deeds will be intended solely for You).”
    99. And when any of these disbelievers who have been promoting falsehood comes upon the encounter with death, he prays and beseeches Allah his Lord to have him sent back to life.
    100. He says, “If given the chance, I may be able to do all I have neglected and left undone and imprint my deeds with piety.” Never! But this is a wish he expresses in words! Beyond them is isthmus until the Day they are made to rise again.
    101. And when the trumpet is blown on the Day of Judgment, no ties of kinship will be of avail, nor will they be able to ask or discourse on any point.
    102. There and then, those whose deeds of piety surpass in weight will be the fortunate who will be the prosperers.
    103. And those whose inequities surpass in weight on one scale of the balance will be losers. Their iniquities and unjust treatment of Our revelations and signs have lost themselves in Hell eternally abiding.
    104. Their faces will be seared with the Fire, their countenances will be expressive of pain and torture, and they are therein glumly glowering.
    105. And there, they will be told, “Were not My verses recited to you and My evident signs presented to you? And did you not always treat them as lies?”
    106. And there they will say, “O Allah our Lord, our pride and wretchedness got the better of our prudence, and we were certainly lost in the maze of error.”
    107. “O Allah our Lord,” they will add, “Get us out of Hell. We will conform to Your system of faith and worship and if we should turn renegades then we will be unjust wrongdoers.”
    108. “Be spurned into it,” Allah will tell them, “(with hardship and torture) and do not speak to Me.
    109. “When some of My servants pleaded for mercy and forgiveness and prayed, ‘O Allah our Lord, we have believed in You. Forgive us and have mercy on us. You are the Most Merciful of all who can extend mercy,’
    110. “You just made them the object of scoffing that you forgot all about My Remembrance and you laughed them to scorn.
    111. “But as you can see, I have recompensed them this day for their patience and forbearance. They are the triumphant ones.”
    112. “How long,” says Allah, “do you think you lingered in the earth (year in and year out)?”
    113. “A day or a part of a day,” they say, “but You may ask those (the angels) who keep count (since we are preoccupied by our torture).”
    114. Allah will say to them, “You only lingered for a short while, if you had only known!
    115. “Did you reckon that We created you and brought you in the world below purposelessly and that you would not be brought back to Us (when there is much to answer for? Never).”
    116. Exalted be Allah, the Supreme Sovereign King. There is no god but Him, the Sovereign Who occupies the Most Honorable and Supreme Throne.
    117. And he who invokes or associates with Allah another god without presenting proof will have much to answer for. This is in reply to the charges put against him by Allah his Lord on the Day of Judgment. Never will the disbelievers (who deny Allah and His statutes) find an instance of prosperity in the hereafter.
    118. And so, pray to Allah my Lord, invoking Him for mercy, thus: “O Allah my Lord, (You ascribed mercy and forgiveness, forbearance, and indulgence unto Yourself.) Forgive me and have mercy on me and on those whom You will; You are indeed the Most Gracious and Merciful Whose mercy is extended to the wide circle of all.”


