SURAH 24
AN-NUR
The Light
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed in Madinah and has 64 verses. It is the surah in which Allah enjoins the purification of the Muslim community from adultery. It warns against giving a speaking tongue to scandals, indicating the deterring punishment. The proof of the act of adultery requires four witnesses except in the case of husband and wife, where it admits of certain relaxation. False accusation without proof is severely punishable. The surah also indicates the rules of behavior, conditions of society, the moral code which must be embodied in general custom, and the manners which must prevail in the Muslim community on entering strange houses, the position of children and servants, and those entitled to see women’s embellishment. This is the surah in which Allah describes His light in a way perceived by the human mind in the invisible influence irresistibly attracting whom He wills. Then mosques are made mention of, and the deeds of the disbelievers are contrasted with those of the believers. The surah then deals with the manners to be observed in families, as regards relations, children, and adults in relation to mingling among family members, and whom a believer is allowed to eat with. Finally, it describes the traits of believers when the Messenger calls upon them to join hands for a serious matter. The surah also shows the absolute authority and knowledge of Allah Almighty.

    1. This is a surah We have revealed enjoining certain specific precepts in which Allah authoritatively binds mankind by a moral tie and a religious rite, a surah in which divine signs of enlightenment, wisdom, and spiritual light are intended to influence peoples’ ideas and actions that they may keep Allah in mind.
    2. The woman and the man stained by adultery must be flogged. Flog them with repeated strokes one hundred times and do not be moved with compassion for them, or else you will have failed to fulfill the duty ordained by the religion of Allah if, indeed, you believe in Allah and acknowledge His system of faith and worship and confess the Last Day. And it is mandatory that their punishment be witnessed by a section of believers.
    3. The man stained by adultery does not approach or cohabit but with a woman similarly stained or an idolatress. And the woman stained by adultery does not approach or cohabit but with a man similarly stained or an idolater. This defiled union is absolutely prohibited to the believers.
    4. And those who bring ill fame upon women in wedlock and do not support their accusation by four witnesses are offenders who must suffer for their offense. Flog them with the lash eighty strokes and never accept of them any testimony, for such persons are, indeed, immoral.
    Crimes in Islamic law pertain to the forbidden and to the neglected. The reasons for the prohibition are           (1) protection of the self, (2) protection of religion,          (3) protection of reason, (4) protection of wealth,             (5) protection of honor.
    Thus, murder is an aggression against the self or the life. Intoxicants lead to aggression against the reason. Stealing is an aggression against people’s personal property.
    Jurists divide crimes into three categories: (1) transgression against restrictive ordinances of Allah, (2) retaliation or ransom where peoples’ rights are infringed upon, (3) lesser offenses.
    As to the restrictive ordinances, the Qur’an has clearly indicated the punishment for the violation of each, and at times this has been supplemented by what the Sunnah has added. Retaliation and ransom have been legislated partly by the Qur’an and partly by the judgment of those in authority as has been sanctioned by the Qur’an. As to offenses of lesser degrees, Islam ordained punishments that range between a minimum and a maximum judged by those in authority.
    Crimes which come under restrictive ordinances are seven: (1) fornication, (2) slander of virtuous women, (3) iniquity, (4) stealing, (5) brigandage, (6) drinking intoxicants, (7) turning renegade.
    The punishment for each of these has been specified by the Qur’an with the exception of adultery (stoning), drinking (flogging), and turning renegade (death), whose punishments were ordained by the Sunnah.
    State laws ordained confinement, which never served as a check or a deterrent. However, just as Islam was harsh in the punishment of adultery, it was also fair. The punishment is carried out only when the act has been proved by four witnesses who actually saw it committed. Punishment that is executed in public is no doubt more effective in serving its end.
    5. Exempt from this condemnation are those who humbly repented and imprinted their deeds with righteousness and piety. They (will find) Allah Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful, indeed.
    6. And when those who accuse their wives of adultery have no witnesses but themselves, then the evidence given by any of them alone will be accepted if he binds himself by a sincere oath by Allah solemnly declared four times in attestation of the truth of his statement.
    7. Then the fifth object to which he is sworn is that Allah’s curse be upon himself if he is lying.
    8. (If the wife keeps silent after her husband’s attestation, she will be subjected to the punishment for adultery.) And the expedient which would shove off the wife’s torment is that she binds herself by an oath solemnly declaring four times by Allah in attestation of her husband’s lying.
    9. And the fifth object to which she is sworn is that of an invocatory prayer inviting the anger of Allah upon herself if he is telling the truth.
    10. And had it not been for Allah’s efficacious grace and mercy  abounding in you, He would not have granted people respite. But Allah accepts repentance and the atonement made by people, and He is the Source of Wisdom.
    11. Indeed, those who invented the falsehood—to defame the virtuous woman `A’ishah, the Prophet’s wife—are a band of people among you. Do not consider the incident an evil that has befallen you; on the contrary, it is charitable for that it came out to light (instead of being whispered about with bated breath). Every one of those involved in discrediting the faith will be requited with what is commensurate with his share in the falsified incident. As to him who has moved to lead the imprudent move, he will suffer tremendous torment (laid upon the damned).
    12. If only the Muslims, men and women, as they heard the rumor had realized, as they should have, that they are people who conformed to His will (and thought of themselves as the model of chastity), and rejected the charge as evident falsehood!
    13. If only those who laid the charge had supported their claim by four witnesses! Since they did not come up with the witnesses, then with Allah, they are the liars.
    14. And had it not been for Allah’s efficacious grace and mercy abounding in you here and in the hereafter, you would have been touched with the tremendous torment laid upon you for pressing on into this affair.
    15. You simply give it a speaking tongue, and you utter words with your mouths of a subject you have but no knowledge of, and you reckoned it a simple thing when in fact with Allah it is a tremendous thing.
    16. If only when you Muslims heard the news you exclaimed, “Allah forbid! We must not give this subject a speaking tongue. All Extolment be to You, Allah, and extolled are Your glorious attributes; this is indeed evident falsehood.”
    17. Allah admonishes you not to reiterate such vile conduct ever if, indeed, you believe in Him (since belief directly contradicts such conduct).
    18. Allah renders His signs explicit that they impart to you divine knowledge, and wisdom, and He is All-Knowing and Ever-Wise.
    19. Indeed, those ill-tongued who just love to circulate obscenity on people—guilty or not guilty—among those who have believed will suffer torment for it here and in the hereafter. Allah is All-Knowing; whereas you are not.
    20. And had it not been for Allah’s efficacious grace and mercy abounding in you, and that He displays mercy to those who serve Him and to those who do not (He would have punished you); but He is Ever-Compassionate, Ever-Merciful.
    21. O you who believe, do not follow the footsteps of Satan (nor walk in the footsteps of those with characteristics befitting him). And he who follows the footsteps of Satan must realize that he commands to commit themselves to maleficence and to all that is wrongful and obscene. And had it not been for Allah’s efficacious grace and mercy, He would never have cleansed any of you, but He does cleanse whom He wills, and Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    The following verse refers to the decision of the Prophet’s father-in-law Abu Bakr, who resolved to stop his financial aid to his cousin who was involved in spreading the evil news referred to above. Allah ordered him and those of wealth and means to forget and forgive.
    22. And those of you in whom Allah’s grace abounds must not swear against helping the needy among their kindred and those in want, as well as those who immigrated to where they could best serve Allah’s way. Let them pardon and forgive. Would you not like Allah to forgive (your iniquities)? And Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    23. Cursed, indeed, here and in the hereafter are those who accuse 
    the virtuous women in wedlock who are unaware and believing. 
    These traducers will have a tremendous torment.
    24. The Day will come when their tongues, 
    their hands, and their (legs) feet will have much to bear witness 
    to their (evil) actions.
    25. There and then Allah will requite them in full with what is commensurate with their deeds (and what is owed to Him of acts and rites); because of that they will know that Allah is The Evident Truth.
    26. Wicked women are for wicked men, and, similarly, wicked men are for wicked women. (They both accord in one and their principles and practice accord well together), whereas good women are for good men, and good men are for good women. These are innocent of all that the wicked traduce in propagation and these are blessed with the forgiveness of Allah and with honorable provisions.
    27. O you who have believed, do not enter houses not your own until you have announced yourselves and asked permission and greeted those who dwell therein. This is best for you and mannerly; it is incumbent that you remember this.
    28. And if you find no one therein (or they may be in but not in a condition to receive you), then you must not enter until you are permitted. And if you are told to go back, then simply go back. This imparts to you purity of manners. Allah is All-Knowing of all that you do.
    29. However, it is no fault in you to enter houses not inhabited but where you get your belongings or attain your object (hotels, guest houses, sanctuaries); Allah is All-Knowing of all that you display as well as of all that you keep back.
    30. Say, Prophet, to the believers, to restrain their eyes—which includes obliquity of the eyes, staring a person out of countenance, staring a person up and down, guarding their sexual morality, refraining from unlawful sexual intercourse, and guarding the chastity of their speech. This imparts to them sanctity of manners and chastity. Allah is All-Knowing of all that they do.
    31. And say to the female believers to restrain their eye-sight (which includes obliquity of the eyes, staring a person out of countenance, staring a person up and down), to preserve their private parts, (refraining from unlawful sexual intercourse, and guarding the chastity of their speech) and not to display their embellishment (adventitious ornaments and false additions) but not what is naturally exposed (face and hands), to draw their veils over their shoulders and their bosoms, not to display their adornments or embellishment except to their husbands, their fathers or fathers-in-law, their sons or stepsons, their brothers, their nephews, to their brothers or to their sisters, their women associates, be they friends or reduced to servile state or those on hand, or the male servants who are rendered harmless through age or physical defect, or the children who are still at the stage of knowledge of sex; nor should they stamp their feet to attract attention to what is hidden of their embellishment. Allah exhorts you believers to keep in awe of Him and to entertain the profound piety due to Him so that you may prosper.
    32. And you may unite in matrimony with those who are single, man or woman, and among the men and the women who have been reduced to a servile state. If they are poor, Allah will make His grace abound in them. Allah’s grace embraces the universe, and He is All-Knowing.
    33. And those who cannot marry because they lack the means may abstain and conduct with the principles of morality until Allah makes His grace abound in them. And those on hand who wish to buy their freedom by performing certain paid services deserve attention. You commit a mutually binding agreement to writing if you believe that they qualify—stamped with virtues and sound minds—and give them in benevolence or alms something of the grace of Allah abounding in you. And do not force your female slaves—or any of your females—into prostitution for a worldly gain (a pagan custom) nor make them recover their liberty by prostituting their honor if they seek chastity and purity. And he who forces them into sin will suffer for it; whereas the women will, under the circumstances, be recipients of Allah’s mercy and forgiveness, for Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    34. We have sent down to you evident signs. (We quoted to you instances of punishment), and We referred to those who existed before you, all serving as an admonition for the pious.
    35. Allah is The Light of the heavens and the earth. (His Light is beyond all comparison); it may be likened to a niche wherein is a lamp in a glass, the glass as it were a glittering planet kindled from a blessed tree, an olive tree. It is not confined to the east nor to the west. Its oil almost emits light although not touched by a fire. (Majestic) light superimposed upon (splendorous) light. Allah attracts to His Light whom He wills, and Allah sets forth to mankind parables (by which moral and spiritual relations are typically set forth). And He is All-Knowing of all things.
    Allah’s light floods the universe and attracts the believers. Its power of attraction is especially found in places where He is worshiped and His attributes are glorified.
    36. In these houses of prayer that Allah had permitted to be erected, and His Name be remembered and where He is extolled mornings and evenings.
    37. By people whose feet are irresistibly drawn to these places, people who are not distracted by trade or sale from remembering Allah. Nor are they distracted from religious observances, namely the act of pray, zakah, and holding in fear the Day of Judgment when the hearts sink of extreme fear and the beholdings roll toward all (and weep at what they are glad of or afraid of).
    38. By consequence Allah will recompense them for every deed at the gauge of the best of what they had accomplished and will make all grace abound in them. Allah provides livelihood and fits out meritoriously or gratuitously whom He wills without reckoning. 
    39. As for those who disbelieve in Allah, their deeds are as a mirage in a low land falsely viewed by the parched and thirsty (traveler) as water, and when he reaches the spot in question his hopes are doomed to disappointment. But he finds Allah, The All-Knowing, Who requites him with what is commensurate with his deeds, and Allah is swift, indeed, in reckoning.
    When a thirst-racked traveler is ready to sell his life for water, the desert may tantalize him with intangible rains and imaginary lakes. His heart may leap when he sees spread before him a sudden shimmering sea of water; but as he advances toward it, the bright expanse melts into nothingness. This illusion is created by the difference between the densities of warm and cool air. In the desert, light rays slanting down through the cooler upper air are bent upward when they strike the hot air close to the ground. It is as if a mirror were placed on the desert reflecting the light from the sky. This is similar to poking a stick into a pond: it appears bent at the point where it enters the water. As a result, a man looking at the horizon may see a piece of misplaced sky gleaming like a lake on the sand.
    40. Or a world of darkness similar to that found in the depth of an ocean where billowy waves are superimposed upon billowy waves topped by dark clouds, creating a coat of darkness superimposed upon coats of darkness where he sits or moves misted with darkness so that if he stretches his hand he can hardly see it. And he for whom Allah has not appointed light, will have no light.
    Allah controls the fate of all and governs the vital functions of all in the heavens and on earth. This comprises animal and plant physiology as well as human physiology. Created beings (plants, animals, and inanimate beings), therefore, submit in their entirety (body and self) to Allah and extol in their mode of prayer, His glorious attributes. Man, however, is different; whereas his bodily structures and vital functions extol the glorious attributes of Allah, he himself, pitifully, may not. Some do, others do not. With this in mind, it is then true to say that all creatures (animate and inanimate) in the heavens and on earth extol Allah’s glorious attributes.
    41. Do you not see that all created beings, animate and inanimate, in the heavens and on earth submit to Allah and celebrate His praises and extol His glorious attributes (whether through the bodily structures or through thoughts expressed in words), and so do the birds upon the wind extending their wings. Each group knows its mode of prayer and its mode (of expressing reverence to Allah) and extolling His glorious attributes, and Allah is All-Knowing of all that they do.
    42. And to Allah alone belong the Kingdom, the supreme dominion, and supreme controlling power of the heavens and the earth; and to Him is the purpose for which all are destined.
    43. Do you not see that Allah wafts the clouds as they form and by the air in motion makes them accumulated together in one body, then He condenses them into a dense mass so that you see rain drops issue from their midst. And He causes the clouds to heap upon each other like towers of mountains. Charged with hail or frozen raindrops, He makes them fall in showers to assail whom He wills and He drives them away from whom He wills. The brightness of lightning emitted between the groups of clouds and the ground almost goes away with the sight.
    When a cold front arrives, the sequence of events is fast and dramatic. The cold oncoming air is too heavy to override the warm air in its path and instead burrows underneath. Forced upwards by the intruding cold air mass, the warm, moisture-laden air condenses forming a great vertical bank of dense cumulonimbus cloud, which at times appears as a squall line of dark ominous clouds.
    For snow to form, a cloud must be chilled to a few degrees above or below zero. The cloud droplets are super cooled and freeze together into crystals. Because the crystals carry a thin film of unfrozen water, they mat into snowflakes when they collide. In extreme cold, the crystals are drier and fall as granular snow. Rain that starts in warm air and falls through a cold layer does not turn into snow, but to translucent ice pellets called sleet. Frozen raindrops from high clouds moving through a thunderstorm and hurled about in violent updrafts pick up concentric layers of snow and ice. Finally they plummet to earth as hailstones, pea-sized or golf-ball sized depending on their rough and rumble experiences aloft.
    44. Allah is He Who causes the day and the night to succeed one another (or occur in alternation). This is, indeed, an instructive example and a lesson to those who lift to Allah their inward sight.
    45. And Allah created every (beast) animate being from water. Some walk, moving or crawling with their bellies touching the ground (worms, reptiles); others are bipedal, walking on two feet (man and some animals); and others are quadrupedal, walking on four feet. Allah creates what He wills, and Allah is, indeed, All-Determiner over all things.
    46. We have sent down evident signs. And Allah guides whom He wills to a path of righteousness.
    47. And they say, “We have believed in Allah and in the Messenger, and obeyed his principles and commands.” Then a group of them refrain from joining the faithful in serving Allah’s cause. They are not really believers.
    48. When asked to submit to revelation and accept Allah and His Messenger as the arbiters who would judge between them, some of them object and veer away.
    49. But when they know they are in the right, they do compliantly submit.
    50. Do they reflect the sickness inherent in their hearts, or do they suspect the Messenger’s justice, or do they fear that Allah and His Messenger may encroach upon them? No, but they are indeed the unjust wrongdoers.
    51. Contrasted by contrary motives, the response of those who have truly believed to the call by the Messenger to decide between them according to Allah and His Messenger, is a response of obedience. They always say, “We have heard and we do obey.” These are they whom Heaven will prosper.
    52. And those who obey Allah and His Messenger and keep in apprehension of Allah and entertain the profound piety due to Him will be the triumphant with Allah’s mercy and blessings.
    53. And the hypocrites swear a solemn oath with an appeal to Allah that should you, Muhammad, command them to join forces even though it be at the cost of quitting their homes and forsaking their families, they will go out. Say to them, “Do not swear. The nature of your obedience declares itself in your actions (which do not accord with your words). Allah is, indeed, All-Cognizant of all that you do.”
    54. Say to them, Muhammad, “Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and comply with their commands.” And should you people turn your backs and close your heart’s ears, then the Messenger’s responsibility is simply the fulfillment of his duties and you, your people, are responsible for the duties you bear. Therefore, if you obey him, you shall be guided and he is only responsible for relating the Divine Proclamation (and the elucidation of its text).
    55. Allah has promised those who have believed and done deeds of righteousness. “I will depute them on earth,” He declares, “and delegate them to keep the scale, and commission them with power to maintain the right.” I will set them in the appropriate social scale just as I deputed those before them in whose hearts reigned piety. And I will confirm for them the religion I have chosen for them as the appropriate system of faith and worship. I will also exchange the fear and the dread which fell upon them for peace, provided they worship Me with appropriate acts and rites and do not associate other deities with Me.” And he who henceforth disbelieves—he and such persons will be (the faithless perverse who are) morally depraved.
    56. And perform the prayer and give the zakah and obey the Messenger of Allah so that you may, it is hoped, invite His mercy and blessings.
    57. Do not reckon, Prophet, that the disbelievers are in a position to defy Allah or upset His plan for those on earth. They are destined to the abode in Hell, and how miserable indeed is the destination!
    58. O you who have believed: Those on hand serving you, and the children who have not reached the age of discretion must ask your permission three times before entering your rooms when you are improperly dressed—before dawn prayer, when undressed for the mid-day rest, and following your last night prayer (when you are ready to go to sleep): three prescribed periods of privacy. Other than these particular periods, you are absolved and so are they to move freely and to come round attending to each other. Thus does Allah distinctly express to you people His signs (revelations) guiding you to the proper way of life relative to moral conduct. Allah is All-Knowing and the Ever-Wise.
    59. And when your children come of age or reach puberty, they must ask permission before they enter homes that are not their own and before they enter rooms where you are admitting of relaxation or sleeping, just as those who preceded them asked permission. Thus does Allah distinctly express to you His signs (guiding you to the proper way of life relative to moral conduct). Allah is All-Knowing and Ever-Wise.
    60. And those of the women who have lost hope of matrimonial union are absolved to take off their outer vestment provided they do not display any adventitious ornaments (which draw forth men’s interest or cause them to come to them by influencing their appetites). However, if they keep abstaining and conform their life and conduct to the principles of morality and use their outer garment, it is much charitable for them (and may guard them against temptation and from being supposed). And Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    61. There is no restriction on the blind and the lame, the sick and yourselves to eat at the homes of your fathers or your mothers, your brothers or your sisters, at the homes of your paternal uncles or your paternal aunts, your maternal uncles or your maternal aunts, or at the homes whose keys you possess or at the homes of your friends. Nor is it a fault should you eat together or separately. And when you enter houses, greet one another with words expressive of good wishes and of Allah’s blessings (and expressive of courteous recognition). Thus does Allah make evident to you the signs so that you may comprehend.
    62. Indeed, the believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger. And when they are in council with him on a matter of common interest, they do not break off individually or together until they have been permitted. Those of them who ask your permission under the circumstances, Muhammad, are indeed those who believe in Allah and His Messenger. Therefore, should they ask your permission to leave (for a valid reason), then you may give permission to whom you will and invoke on their behalf Allah’s forgiveness. Allah is, indeed, Ever-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    63. O you who have believed, do not address the Messenger in the same manner you address one another, nor mention his name without annexing to it an attribute irrespective of whether he is present or absent. Allah is fully aware of those of you who slip away quietly from the assemblies screening themselves behind others. Those who transgress the Messenger’s command or willfully neglect it had better know (that he who disobeys the Messenger disobeys Allah), and by consequence may Allah wed them to a calamity here and torment them painfully in the hereafter.
    64. Indeed, to Allah belong all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. He is All-Knowing of your innermost being and of your disposition and  your condition, and on the Day of Judgment when all are sent back to assemble before Him for Judgment, He will inform them of all that they had done. Allah is All-Knowing of everything.


