SURAH 25
AL-FURQAN
The Criterion
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah has 77 verses. They are all Makkan except verses 68 – 70.
    The surah starts by a statement of the high status of the Qur’an, and the vastness of the creation of Allah Who sent it down, and Who  has supreme dominion of the heavens and the earth. Despite His sovereignty, the disbelievers associate idols with Him, hold the Qur’an as false, and deny the mission of the Messenger on the ground that he is a human being who eats food and walks in marketplaces. They adamantly demand angels to convey the message to them. Had He made His messengers angels, He would have made them in the shape of men that could communicate with human beings, and then the same confusion would have remained. The disbelievers objected to the revelation of the Qur’an in portions, and so were informed of the wisdom behind this. Following this, there are expressive parables of prophets and their nations who followed their own vanity and thus became like cattle or even worse. Then follow cosmic verses providing evidence of the omnipotence of Allah, and calling for learning and acquiring knowledge. The surah concludes with the characteristics of believers that make them the inhabitants of the higher chambers of Paradise, where they are with greeting and peace.
 
    1. Blessed be Allah Who has sent down to His bondman (the Messenger Muhammad) the Qur’an, which He sent down serving as the Criterion (illuminating the intellect and imparting the soundness of judgment in the choice of means and ends). It conducts the Messenger to act as a warning to all the worlds.
    2. (Blessed be He) Who has the Kingdom, the supreme dominion, and the supreme controlling power of the heavens and the earth. He is the Creator Who has never begotten a son and has never allowed anyone to share His sovereignty. He created everything, and each and all He has determined in due proportion (and to attain a certain object and a precise purpose).
    3. Yet the disbelievers fared worse by taking false gods besides Allah, objects of worship that can create nothing (animate or inanimate); in fact, they themselves were created. Furthermore, they have no power to control their own destiny, nor can they defend themselves against what is destined to do them harm, nor stop what is meant to profit them, nor do they have the power to give life or to cause death, nor can they effect resurrection.
    4. And the disbelievers go on to say, “This (the Qur’an) is a fraud which Muhammad has fabricated with the help of others [the People of the Book] (and he deceitfully uses it for the advancement of his religion).” How wrongful can they get and how unjust can they be to cause what is true to be rejected as forgery!
    5. And they designate the divine discourse myths and say, “Tales of old which he (the Messenger) dictated and read out to him morning and evening.”
    6. Say to them, Prophet, “This Qur’an is a divine discourse sent down from heaven; it is sent down by Him Who is All-Knowing of the secrets in the heavens and the earth. He has always been All-Forgiving, and Ever-Merciful.”
    7. And they foolishly say, “What kind of a messenger is this who eats food and walks about in marketplaces? If only an angel be sent down (to accompany him and share his duty) and help him accomplish his purpose of warning people against infidelity!
    8. “Or a treasure were sent down to him from heaven or an orchard put in his possession to use as a source of food!” This is besides the allegation of the unjust who say (to those who think alike), “You simply follow a man bewitched.”
    9. Look how they strike, Prophet, irrelevant similes  reflecting such error that they are unable to strike on the way of truth.
    10. Blessed be Allah and exalted are His glorious attributes Who is All-Powerful to provide you if He decides, with what is far better (than what they describe) gardens beneath which rivers flow and to confer on you gratuitously ownership of palaces.
    11. But the truth is that they denied the predetermined Final Hour. However, We have prepared for those who deny the Final Hour the fierce blazes of Hell.
    12. No sooner do they come within the range of its sight than they hear its roaring under the influence of rage, heaving sighs of groaning for the evil that will befall them.
    13. And when they are cast into its grim strait confines bound to their kind, and their feet chained to their necks, they will invoke detriment (and wish they could perish).
    14. But they are told, “Do not invoke detriment once but invoke it repeatedly. (You will never get rid of the situation you are in, and will suffer different kinds of torture.)”
    15. Say to them, “Is this troublesome and distressing situation better or the garden of eternity (Paradise) promised to those who have piously believed— the garden which Allah has set apart for the recompense of those faithful to Him, and He has determined that it will be their eternal destination?”
    16. It is the garden wherein they will have any object to decide on (affording pleasure and satisfaction). Any wish they express in words or in thought will be instantly fulfilled, for they will have passed to eternity—a promise of your Lord Allah to be requested (and fulfilled).
    17. And on the Day of Judgment when He musters them together with those objects (animate or inanimate) they worshiped apart from Allah, He will question those false gods, “Did you mislead these bondmen of Mine, or did they err from the prescribed way of their own accord?”
    18. “Extolled be to You, Allah,” they will say, “how could we when it is not at all befitting to take patrons apart from You? The truth is that You, Allah, granted these people, together with their fathers, all the enjoyment of Your blessings in life until they forgot to remember You (and became oblivious of divine revelation). And by consequence they had sealed their own fate and became lost.”
    19. Then the disbelievers will be told, “You see, your gods have accused you of lies and want of conformity to fact (and consequently you will not escape the torment, nor can you be afforded help).” (And now a warning is issued to all.) Thus, you people at large must know that he who is unjust of actions will taste the great torment.
    20. We never sent messengers before you, Prophet, but they were human who ate food and walked in the markets. We also tested the people by exposing opposites to each other. Therefore, will you people who have conformed to Islam be persistent, constant, and patient in the face of difficulties and hindrances and exercise patience? Your Lord, Creator is All-Seeing Whose constant vigilance has always been extended to all His creatures.
    21. And those who do not hope for a meeting with Us on the Day of Judgment, say, “If only the angels would be sent down to us or we could see Allah!” They are extravagant in their accounts of themselves. They display inordinate pride and insolently rebel in disobedience and in false pride.
    22. But the Day they see the angels, no joyful tidings will there be to the criminals who had been given to sin. “You disbelievers,” say the angels, “created an impassable barrier between yourselves and Allah’s mercy, a barrier which shuts you up in this vast dungeon.”
    23. And We go forward Ourselves to all that they accomplished in life and reduce it (together with their infidelity-based hope springing eternal in their breasts) to a worthless waste as if it were dust dissipated in the wind (or mist dispelled by dispersion).
    24. The occasion for those destined to win the Garden will be a great occasion for the splendid and stately repository where they repose and live in splendor.
    25. And keep in mind, Prophet, that the Day will come when the heaven break into mists and the angels are sent down in succession.
    26. There and then will the true sovereign authority and the true supreme control be exclusively that of Allah, The All-Merciful. What a day it will the disbelievers—a day of extreme hardships!
    27. This is the day the unjust wrongdoer will bite his hands to intimate regret for all that he had done and for what he had left undone; he will wish he had taken the way with the Messenger.
    28. And he adds, “Woe betide me, I wish I had not taken such a man for a close fellow.”
    29. “He misled me and caused my loss in the maze of error (and made me reject and neglect the divine and noble words). Indeed, Satan seduces man and abandons man constantly.”
    30. And there will the Messenger say to Allah his Lord his discontent at his people: “O Allah my Lord, I presented to my people Your divine message, but my people took a dislike to the Qur’an and they were adamant in forsaking it.”
    31. Thus We made to every prophet some enemies from the criminal transgressors against the divine law. But enough is Allah your Lord to be the Guide and Vindicator to whom He wills and to afford help to whom He wills.
    32. Again the disbelievers say, “If only the Qur’an were sent down to him all at once!” But We reveal it in this manner to lay it to your heart and establish it firmly so that it prevails upon you, Muhammad, and you be confirmed in action and purpose, and We recite it distinctly.
    33. Nor do they present you with challenging questions and unreasonable similitudes but We present you with the truth and the best explanation (meeting their objections and their arguments).
    34. These are they who will be mustered on the Day of Judgment dragged on their faces (in chains to take their abode) in Hell. These are they who have assumed the worst position here and in the hereafter and have erred away from the way.
    35. They are not different from those to whom We sent Musa (Moses). We gave Musa the Book (the Tawrah) and We made with him his brother Harun (Aaron) as a minister (to help him accomplish his mission).
    36. And We said to them, “Go both of you to the people who have denied Our revelations and treated Our divine authoritative signs as lies. We destroyed them altogether.
    37. “And the people of Nuh (Noah) who cried lies to the messengers, We drowned them and made of them an example and a deterrent to the people; therefore We have prepared for the unjust wrongdoers the painful torment.”
    38. Met with a similar destiny were the people of `Ad, the people of Thamud, and the people of the Rass  and many generations in between (who sealed their fate).
    39. And to each and all of them did We set parables. We set examples of typical instances forming a particular case of a principle. We set examples, some relative to action and conduct, that induce imitation, and others to serve as a warning, and each and all We annihilated utterly.
    40. In fact the people of the Quraysh tribe in their commercial travels have come repeatedly by the town of Lut (Lot), which was showered with the direful rain. It makes you wonder: Did they not see it? No, but they do not entertain the fact of uprising (nor do they regard it with fear should it be true). 
    41. And as usual (their pride gets the better of their prudence), and when they see you, Muhammad, they insolently receive you with nothing but disdain and mockery in their eyes, and they say, “Is this the Messenger whom Allah has sent to convey His message!”
    42. “He almost succeeded,” they add, “in influencing our thoughts against our gods, and he nearly made us err, and our sober wishes almost learned to stray, had it not been for our endure patiently and constantly.” But on the Day they see the torment laid upon the damned, they will then know who had been led in misguidance away from the way.
    43. Do you see, Messenger, the one whose ruling prejudices have been taken as a god? Do you think you will be a trustee over his behavior or for his inclination? (You are only a sign and a warning.)
    44. Or do you reckon that most of them hear or consider? They are like cattle, in fact even worse, for the only way they see is that leading to loss in the maze of error.
    45. Do you not see how Allah your Lord extended the shadow of any object (intercepting the sun or other luminary)? Had He willed, He would have made it still, and We made the sun the indication asserting the phenomenon, its presence and its dimensions. 
    The shadow caused by a body intercepting the sun or other luminary is short-lived because it moves and accompanies or follows the source of light and, by consequence, becomes prolonged. Had the earth been still, not moving round its axis with a slight tilt, nor round the sun, the shadow would have remained still. This holds good also if the earth’s motion round its axis equaled the time it takes to revolve round the sun. Who could have made such mechanism so precise but the Creator, Allah?      
    46. And then We reduce it to a smaller compass and make it gradually disappear (having been made to contract and vanish by the same invisible hand that made it and created it). 
    47. And it is He Who made the night a vestment sleep a repose (and black was the color chosen to absorb all light and sleep), and We made the day a phase of rising up (and activity).
    48. And it is He Who sends forth the winds as glad tidings of His mercy heralding a joyful event (rain, vegetation, fertilization) and We send down from heaven pure fresh water—
    Rainwater as it forms is, indeed, pure. As it comes down, it inevitably becomes somewhat polluted by the impurities in the air, especially in areas where man-made impurities prevail. Polluted rain is man-made.
    49. With which We revive the dead land of a given town and supply drinking-water to the living among Our creation, including cattle and a great many human beings.
    50. And We propounded it among the whole so that they may remember Allah. But most mankind refuse to choose but ungratefulness, disobedience, and disbelief.
    51. And had We willed, We would have sent to the people of every town (a sign and) a warning.
    52. Therefore, do not obey, Muhammad, to the disbelievers and strive against them with great striving by the divine means (the Qur’an). (But should they wage war against you, then fight back by physical means.)
    53. And it is He Who sent the waters of the two seas merging together, one fresh and sweet and the other salty and bitter, and between both He installed an isthmus and an invisible partition which serves as an impassable barrier. (The fresh water floats above the salty and there are laws that govern the separation and the depth.)
    54. And it is He Who brought into being, out of a watery liquid, a human mortal and made him evolve lineal by blood and join affinity with others through marriage, and Allah your Lord has always been All-Determiner. 
    55. And yet some people worship, apart from Allah, those who do not profit them or harm them. But the disbeliever has always been a help, corroborating and substantiating disobedience to Allah.
    56. Nonetheless, We only sent you, Muhammad, to humanity as a bearer of good tidings and a warning.
    57. Say to the disbelievers, “I do not charge you a price for imparting to you Allah’s divine knowledge. My only reward is to see the one who has decided to set himself on the way of righteousness (the path that leads directly to Allah, his Lord).”
    58. And rely, Muhammad, on The Living Who does not die, and praise Him and extol His glorious attributes, and enough is He to be Ever-Cognizant of His bondmen’s guilty deeds and wrongdoings (and to equitably punish them for such deeds).
    59. Praise be to Him Who created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them and brought them into existence in six days (determined by His own unit of time). Then He levelled Himself on the Throne of supremacy and dominion and of grace and mercy, the All-Merciful, as He is, Whose attributes you may learn when asking any cognizant about Him, the One Who knows, Who is All-Knowing of everything.
    60. And when the disbelievers are asked to prostrate to Him, the All-Merciful, they ask, “Who is The All-Merciful? Shall we prostrate in reverence and submission to an object of worship just because you enjoin us to do so?” Their statement accords with their actions. They withdraw further, and their mental attitude is an incitement to their repulsion*.
    61. Praise be to Him and blessed are His glorious attributes Who installed in the heavens a belt of the celestial sphere divided into twelve equal constellations (signs of the zodiac—through one of which the sun passes  each month). (The belt extends eight or nine degrees on both sides of the ecliptic within which the apparent motions of the sun, moon, and principle planets take place.) He installed therein a lamp, the sun, glowing for illumination and a moon, earth’s satellite dispersing light (to dispel the darkness of the night).
-------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    62. And it is He who caused the night and the day to follow one upon another and occur in succession, a phenomenon inciting whoever wishes to ponder the marvels of Allah and keep remembering Him, lifting to Him his inward sight, wishing to be thankful.
    63. And how richly rewarded will be the bondmen of Allah who observe acts of worship enjoined by The All-Merciful. They walk on earth softly, gently, and in humility. When addressed by the ignorant (whose imprudence gets the better of them), they answer them with the expression of good will, “Peace.”
    64. Also richly rewarded will be those who spend a good part of the night prostrating upright in worship of Allah their Lord. (They stand in awe of Him and entertain the profound reverence due to Him.)
    65.Rewarded also are those who express their thoughts in their invocatory prayer thus: “Save us and turn about from us, O Allah our Lord, the torment of Hell, for its torment is indeed painfully grievous and eternal.”
    66. How odious it is for a repository and how evil it is for a habitation!
    67. Rewarded will be the worshipers who are neither extravagant nor niggardly; when they spend they do not play the prodigal, nor do they act parsimoniously, but they follow a medium way.
    68. Rewarded, too, will be the worshipers who do not invoke besides Allah another god, nor do they kill that Allah has prohibited, unless it be justified for a truthful cause, nor do they commit adultery. He who commits himself to such an evil line of conduct will pay a penalty for these sinful acts.
    69. His torment will be doubled on the Day of Resurrection when he will have passed to eternal suffering degraded by multiplied wrongs and humiliations,
    70. Unless he had repented and believed and did righteous deeds. For such persons will Allah exchange their odious deeds for fair and virtuous deeds, and Allah has always been All-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    71. He who repents and views his past actions with dissatisfaction and regrets, and does righteous deeds will have humbly repented (and will have turned faithfully) to Allah.
    72. Rewarded will be the worshipers who do not give false evidence nor listen to it, and should they come upon someone whose mouth is full of idle talk, they pass by withdrawing honorably (and with self-sustained dignity).
    73. Richly rewarded will be the worshipers who are submissive to Allah. When they are reminded of their Lord's (Allah’s) revelations, marvels, and authoritative signs, they do not collapse upon them with deaf and blind.
    74. The worshipers Who invoke their Lord (Allah) to give them wives and progeny, who make their eyes speak content and to this effect they pray thus: “We pray and beseech You, O Allah our Lord, to grace us with wives and progeny whom we view with concord and content and are comfort to our eyes, and make of us leaders of righteousness for the pious.”
    75. These (with all the above-mentioned attributes combined) are they who are destined to receive the richest reward. They will occupy the high and mighty compartment in the Garden of Eden, the epithet of dignity and great honor. This is in token of their patience, forbearance, and endurance. Therein they will be received with hearty welcome and greeted with the best expressions of good will, and will rest eternally assured of peace and security,
    76. Wherein they will have passed to eternity. How excellent it is for a repository and how excellent it is for a destination!
    77. Say, Muhammad, to the disbelievers, “Allah my Lord would not, in fact, care for you nor attach importance or weight to you had it not been for the few among you who pray and invoke Him for mercy and forgiveness. You have cried lies to the truth, (and your transgression will be laid to your charge), and you will have much imposed on you and much to answer for.”


