SURAH 26
ASH-SHU`ARA’
The Poets
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah is Makkan and has 227 verses.
    At its beginning the surah includes a reference to the status of the Qur’an. Then it moves to threatening the disbelievers that Allah is All-Powerful to inflict punishment on them. The surah then comforts the Prophet as regards his people’s holding him as a liar by means of narrating what a group of Allah’s messengers were met with and how their people accused them of lying. It tells the story of Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) meeting with Pharaoh and how he charged them with lying. Then Allah Almighty mentions the stories of Ibrahim (Abraham), the Father of Prophets; Nuh (Noah) with his people; Hud with the `Ad; and Salih with the Thamud. Following this, the surah expounds the call of Lut and the story of Shu`ayb with the woodlanders.
    Anyone who contemplates the stories of these eight prophets will see that the essence of their message was the same and that the way the disbelievers rejected their message was the same. The surah then ends with calling attention to the high rank of the Qur’an, exactly as it started with the same notion. It concludes by a refutation of the claim that the Prophet was a poet, or that the Qur’an was poetry.
 
    1. T (ta). S (sin). M (mim). The surah opens with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. These are divine verses flowing with the evidence and grace symbolic of the Book (the Qur’an).
    3. Seemingly, Prophet, you are betaking yourself in pursuit of the disbelievers with distress, regret, and discontent.
    4. If We will, We could easily send down to them from Heaven a  physical sign revealing to them Our omnipotence and authority, a sign to which they will have to bend their necks in subjugation and submission. 
    5. The truth is that no recent Reminder comes to them from The All-Merciful, but they (habitually oppose it, and) turn away from it.
    6. They labeled the truth (the Qur’an) as lying. But soon they will realize the tidings of all that has been said in this Book that they mock at.
    7. Do they not see how We made the earth a source of vegetation and made vegetal growth of like things of every kind emerge from it?
    8. This is indeed emblematic of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, but most of the disbelievers turn a deaf ear to Allah’s message.
    9. Allah your Lord is indeed The Ever-Almighty, The Ever-Merciful (Who sends signs and warnings and puts punishment in respite).
    10. And tell your nation, Muhammad, the story of Musa (Moses) when Allah called him and commanded him thus: “Go to the people of Pharaoh who are unjust wrongdoers,
    11. “Who seem to be unwilling to be pious and for their own sake fear Allah (and stop persecuting the Children of Isra'il)!”
    12. “O Allah my Lord,” Musa said, “I have a feeling of the probability of their crying lies to me.
    13. “And my chest becomes drawn tight and my tongue becomes restrained from free expression in arguing with them; therefore I pray (and beseech You, Allah my Lord), to send to my brother Harun (Aaron).
    14. “And the guilt of blood is against me and I have ground for alarm, for they might kill me.”
    15. “They will not kill you,” Allah said. “Both of you just go with Our signs (evincing both omnipotence and authority). We will be there with you, listening and vindicating you.
    16. “And so, both of you go to Pharaoh and say to him, ‘We are bearers of the divine Message sent by Allah, Lord of the worlds,
    17. Who commands us to tell him to release the Children of Isra'il from bondage and to let them go with us.’”
    18. “Did we not nurture you, Musa,” said Pharaoh, “from infancy as one of us, and you spent of your life among us a good number of years?
    19. “And you did what you did (the terrible crime of killing a man of my people), and you have impelled yourself into disbelief and ungratefulness to our grace which abounds in you (when you claimed that you are the Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds).”
    20. “I did what I did then,” Musa said, “when I was one of the erring.
    21. “In consequence I took flight when I feared that you might avenge your right. But Allah my Lord, (knowing that the guilt did not reside in my intention), vested me with soundness of judgment, and made me one of the Messengers.”
    22. “And do you, Pharaoh,” Musa added, “make me feel indebted to you for reducing the Children of Isra'il to slavery and subjecting them to bondage?”
    23. Pharaoh asked, “And who is Allah, the Lord of the world?” 
    24. “The Lord of the heavens and the earth,” Musa said, “and of all that is in between if you and your people care for certitude.”
    25. “Do you listen to that?” Pharaoh said to those around him.
    26. “He is Allah,” said Musa, “your Lord and the Lord of your ancestry (among whom some claimed godship as you do).”
    27. “Your messenger,” Pharaoh said to his people, “who has been sent to you is, indeed, a madman.”
    28. “Not only that,” Musa added, “but He is Allah, the Lord of the East and the West and of all that lies between them if you really care to come to consideration.”
    29. “Let me warn you,” Pharaoh said to Musa, “should you take a god besides me, I will shut you up as one of the prisoners.”
    30. “Even if I present you,” Musa said, “with an evident sign?”
    31. “Then exhibit it to view,” Pharaoh said, “if indeed you are telling the truth.” (Pharaoh said that in an attempt to find a weak point in Musa’s argument.)
    32. And there did Musa cast his staff on the ground and instantaneously it was transformed into an evident serpent.
    33. And he drew his hand (from the folds of his garment), and there it was instantaneously transfigured to white radiance to the onlookers.
    34. There and then Pharaoh said to the chiefs around him, “Indeed, this man is skilled in sorcery.” (He said that lest they should submit to the truth brought by Musa.)
    35. “He means,” Pharaoh added, “to drive you people out of your land by his sorcery. Therefore, what course of action do you suggest we take?”
    36. They said, “The time to degrade him has not come yet, so put him off and his brother. Meanwhile, Pharaoh, send some of your recruits to the cities to muster the multitude of men who practice magic.
    37. “And ask them to bring back those who are skilled sorcerers.”
    38. And the sorcerers were assembled (before noon) on their known (festive) day.
    39. And the people were urged to attend the event. (Expressing their thoughts in words), they added,
    40. “We accept the authority of the sorcerers should they win (and espouse their opinions and their cause).”
    41. And when the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, “We will be rewarded should we be the winners?”
    42. “Yes, indeed,” Pharaoh said, “and you will be near-stationed (and entitled to be among my retinue).”
    43. Musa said to the sorcerers, “Cast upon the ground all that you wish to cast.”
    44. And as they were casting their ropes and rods (they invoked Pharaoh in supplication for aid and success). They prayed, “By Pharaoh’s might, we will be the winners!”
    45. And when Musa cast his staff, it swallowed all the fraudulent devices they had cast upon the ground.
    46. (Overwhelmed with wonder,) the sorcerers were cast down, prostrating themselves (in comely order and praise of Allah).
    47. And they declared submission: “We believe in Allah, and we surrender ourselves to Him, the Lord of the worlds,
    48. “The Lord of Musa and Harun.”
    49. And here said Pharaoh to them, “Have you believed him and surrendered yourselves to his God without my permission? This is indeed a deceitful plan designed by your master who taught you sorcery, and you will soon come to know how heavily you will pay for this! I will amputate your hands and your feet on opposite sides and I will have you all crucified.”
    50. “We are not afraid of this (of your torture),” they said. “We return to our Lord, Allah, we are turning back to Him Who might confer on us the glorious privilege of martyrdom.
    51. “In fact,” they added, “our only hope is that Allah our Lord extends His mercy to us and forgives us our sins and our sinful acts of fraudulent magic, for being foremost in acknowledging His supreme sovereignty, omnipotence, and authority.”
    52. Meanwhile, We revealed to Musa to conduct the Israelites My bondmen  by night to the sea and We said to him, “Be sure you will be followed by Pharaoh and his people.”
    53. Pharaoh sent musterers to all his cities to call up the people to organize themselves for the defeat of Musa and his people.
    54. He said to them, “Musa and his people (the Israelites) are a gang of few contemptible bodies.
    55. “And they provoked our anger and came within the measure of our rage.
    56. “And we are all cautious and on our guard.”
    57. Wherefore, We expelled Pharaoh and his people from the land of gardens and springs,
    58. The land of treasures (of gold and silver), and of an honorable station (of homes and accommodations so splendid).
    59. And so it was, and We made the land inheritable by the Children of Isra'il, to whom We conveyed the right of the property (after We drowned Pharaoh and his people).
    60. Pharaoh and his people followed Musa and his people at sunrise.
    61. And when the two bodies of men came within each other’s sight, the companions of Musa exclaimed, “We are evidently overtaken.”
    62. “Not at all,” Musa said. “Allah my Lord is with me  to guide me as He wills.”
    63. We revealed Musa to strike the sea with his staff, and there did the sea split into two enormous divisions, each partition as immense as a huge mountain.
    64. And We drew forward Pharaoh and his people to tail Musa and his people (who were then in the footpath).
    65. And We delivered Musa and all those with him (by keeping the sea solid until they had crossed).
    66. Thereafter We drowned Pharaoh and all those with him (by making the seawater envelop them when they tried to cross). 
    67. This is, indeed, a sign of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, but most of them disbelieved in Allah the Creator.
    68. And Allah your Lord is indeed Ever-Almighty and Ever-Merciful. 
    69. And recite to the people, Messenger, the narrative of Ibrahim (with his father).
    70. He asked his father and his people, “What do you people worship?”
    71. “We worship idols” they said in pride, “and we linger consecrated to them.”
    72. “Do they hear you,” Ibrahim asked, “when you praise them or invoke them?
    73. “Or do they profit you (if you obey them), or harm you (if you disobey them)?”
    74. “No,” they said, “but this is exactly the system of worship our fathers adopted, which we followed suit.”
    75. “Do you see,” Ibrahim said in rebuke, “all those you revered as objects of worship,
    76. “And you and your fathers and your ancestors treated with devotion?
    77. “They are enemies to me (and to Allah, the Creator of the worlds); therefore, I do not worship them, but I worship Allah,
    78. The Creator, Who brought me into existence, and it is He Who guides me (to the path of righteousness).
    79. “It is He Who provides me with food and drink. 
    80. “And when I fall sick, it is He Who cures me.
    81. “And it is He Who determines my death and occasions my resurrection (for reckoning and reward or punishment),
    82. “The Creator Who I hope will forgive me all my offenses on the Day of Doom.
    83. “And to Him I say, thus: ‘Confer on me, O Allah my Lord, wisdom to help me judge rightly in matters and to impart to me soundness of judgment, and join me, Allah, with the society of the righteous.
    84. “‘And furnish me, Allah my Creator, with a tongue uttering the truth and that is believed among posterity.
    85. “‘And if You destine me, I will be one of those inheriting the Garden of the supreme bliss.
    86. “‘And extend, Allah my Creator, Your mercy and forgiveness to my father who was lost in the maze of error.’” (A prayer invoked by Ibrahim before he realized that his father was not on the path of guidance.)
    87. “‘And do not occasion me to fall from grace on the Day of Rising again,
    88. “‘The Day when neither wealth nor sons will be of profit.
    89. “‘Except to him who comes to the audience of Allah with a sound heart (filled with devotion).’”
    90. This is the Day when the Garden will be brought quite near to these (in whose hearts reigned piety).
    91. And Hell is brought forward to those who were misguided (and spent their days in vanity).
    92. They will be asked, “Where now are those gods you worshiped (instead of Allah),
    93. The gods you venerated apart from Allah? Do they afford you help or can they even vindication themselves?”
    94. There and then the misguided will be cast in Hell headlong one batch after another.
    95. And added to them will be those people and jinn who served Iblis [Satan] (all into one gathering and in one place).
    96. And when all have been gathered in Hell and have exchanged angry contention, the disbelievers will say,
    97. “By Allah, we wandered, indeed, from the path of rectitude and were lost in error.
    98. “We have equalized you false gods with Allah, Lord of the worlds.”
    99. And they add, “No one led us to the maze of error but the wicked who were given to sin and crime.”
    100. “And now,” they will exclaim, “no one can defend us, nor will we find intercessors (who would interpose on our behalf).
    101. “Nor do we find an intimate friend.
    102. “If only we could be given another chance of life below, we would be among those believers (who exercise low submissive obeisance to Allah and entertain the profound reverence due to Him).”
    103. This is, indeed, a sign of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, but most of Ibrahim’s people disbelieve in Allah, Who brought them into existence.
    104. Allah your Lord is indeed Ever-Almighty and Ever-Merciful (Who avenges those who deny Him and bestows grace on the benevolent).
    105. Just as averse were the people of Nuh (Noah); they declined to accept Allah’s message (basically the same message conveyed by all the messengers of Allah before and after Nuh). 
    106. Their brother Nuh said to them saying, “Will you not keep being pious to Allah your Lord (and revere Him as He deserves)?
    107. “I come to you,” he added, “with a message that Allah has entrusted to me.
    108. “A message exacting your piety to Allah and obedience to me.
    109. “I do not charge you a reward for imparting to you Allah’s divine knowledge. My reward rests in the hands of Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    110. “And so be pious to Allah as He deserves and obey me.”
    111. They said to Nuh (in rejection), “Shall we believe you and when it is only the decrepit who espoused your cause?”
    112. “But how would I know,” said Nuh, “what they were doing earlier?
    113. “Their reckoning will only be judged by Allah my Lord, if only you could apprehend.
    114. “Nor would I drive away those who are disbelievers.
    115. “I am only a messenger sent by Allah as a warning.”
    116. They said, “We warn you Nuh, unless you cease your course of action, you will be stoned to death.”
    117. And there Nuh prayed, “O Allah my Lord, my people disbelieved me and belied me.
    118. “Judge, Allah, and arbitrate my cause and decide between me and them in Your way, and save me and those believers with me (who conformed to Islam).”
    119. And there, We delivered him along with all those in his company on board the loaded ship.
    120. And We drowned all the others who remained behind (after saving Nuh and those with him).
    121. This is, indeed, a sign of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, but most of them disbelieved in Allah (Who brought them into existence).
    122. And it is Allah your Lord Who is indeed The Ever-Almighty and The Ever-Merciful. 
    123. Just as averse were the people of `Ad, who cried lies to Allah’s message and Messengers.
    124. Their brother Hud said to them, “Will you not be pious to Allah?
    125. “I am a trustworthy messenger entrusted with a divine message to you.
    126. “So be pious to Allah and obey me.
    127. “I do not charge you a reward for this. My reward is only from Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    128. “Do you erect buildings,” he added, “on the top of every high places, signs, mansions, and stately buildings of no avail?
    129. “And do you take for yourselves fortified palaces as though they would protect you and help you abide forever?
    130. “And when you assault, justly or unjustly, you assault as potentates.
    131. “So be pious to Allah, and obey me.
    132. “And be pious to Him Who made all His grace abound in you.
    133. “He graced you with cattle and sons,
    134. “And with (fortified) orchards and (flowing) springs.
    135. “In fact,” he said, “I fear for you an immense torment on a momentous Day.”
    136. But they (insolently and defiantly) said to him, “Whether you admonish us, Hud, or you do not (it is to us one and the same).
    137. “This is nothing other than the customary manner of thinking of those of old.
    138. “Nor will we be subjected to a (retributive) torment.”
    139. And they refused to believe in Our message; therefore, We caused them to perish. This is, indeed, a sign (of Allah’s omnipotence and authority), but most of them were not believers.
    140. And Allah your Lord is, indeed, The Ever-Almighty, The Ever-Merciful.
    141. And just as averse were the people of Thamud, who refused to accept Allah’s (message and) messengers.
    142. Mention to them, Messenger, their brother Salih, who said to them, “Will you not be pious (and keep in awe of Allah your Creator, and entertain the profound reverence due to Him)?
    143. “I am a messenger to you entrusted with a divine message.
    144. “So be pious to Allah and obey me.
    145. “I do not charge you a reward for imparting to you Allah’s divine knowledge. My reward rests in His hands, the Lord of the worlds.
    146. “Do you think,” he said, “you will be left secure, expecting to enjoy the grace of Allah which abounds in you?
    147. “(You live in splendor), and you hold in possession orchards and (flowing) springs,
    148. “And vegetal growth and date palms whose enclosed spathes carries tender, delicious, and easily digestible fruits.
    149. “And you skillfully hew the mountains into homes (wherein you make abode),
    150. “So be pious to Allah and obey me".
    151. “And I advise you not to obey those who are extravagant (in their accounts of themselves, nor yield to their irreverent principles and authority).
    152. “They corrupt in the earth natural to them, and never do they attempt reform that makes the land thrive.”
    153. They said to him, “You are one of those (influenced by witchcraft and, therefore), bewitched.
    154. “You are only a mortal like us (therefore you could not be singled out for prophethood). And if you are, indeed, sincere, then present us with a divine sign.”
    155. “This,” he said, “is a she-camel that is entitled to a share of the drinking water, just as you are entitled to a share. She is to have her share on a certain day and you have yours on a known day.
    156. “And you are warned not to touch her with harm  lest you suffer the torment laid upon the damned on a Tremendous Day.”
    157. Nevertheless, they defiantly hamstrung it, which led to pining regrets and vain remorse.
    158. They were overtaken by Allah’s torment. This is, indeed, a sign of His omnipotence and authority, but most of your people were not believers.
    159. Allah your Lord is, indeed, The Ever-Almighty and The Ever-Merciful. 
    160. (Just as averse were the people of Lut.) They cried lies to Allah’s messengers.
    161. Their brother Lut said to them, “Will you not be pious to Allah?
    162. “So be pious to Allah and obey me.
    163. “A message that exacts your reverence for Allah and obedience to me.
    164. “I do not charge you a reward for imparting to you Allah’s divine knowledge; my reward rests in His hands, the Lord of the worlds.”
    165. “Of all created beings, you go in to males.
    166. “And you leave behind spouses who are created by your Lord. In fact, you are a people who have defiantly transgressed the divine and the moral laws.”
    167. “We warn you, Lut,” they said, “unless you do not refrain, you will be among those ousted from this town.”
    168. “I am one of those,” he said, “who simply abhor your behavior and your doings.”
    169. And he prayed, “I beseech You, Allah my Lord, to deliver me and my family from those people.”
    170. We delivered him along with his family from the people (who were wrongful of actions),
    171. Except a laggard woman who had been carried through age to advanced life, who remained with those behind, Lut’s wife (who approved this evil practice).
    172. And We destroyed the others.
    173. We poured down upon them a direful rain of fire and brimstone, and how evil and devastating was the rain on the heads of those who defiantly ignored Allah’s warning!
    174. This is, indeed, a sign of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, but most of them were not believers.
    175. Allah your Lord is, indeed, The Ever-Almighty, The Ever-Merciful.
    176. Just as averse were the woodlanders (people of Madyan) who cried lies to Allah’s message and messengers.
    177. Their brother Shu`ayb said to them, “Will you not keep being pious to Allah (and entertain the profound reverence due to Him)?
    178. “I am a messenger entrusted with a divine message to you.
    179. “A message that exacts your piety to Allah and obedience to me.
    180. “I do not charge you a reward (for imparting to you Allah’s disclosures of divine knowledge). My reward is from Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    181. “Dispense to the full the quantity ascertained by measuring, and be not of those who make others losers.
    182. “And if you are using the method of weighing, then you are enjoined to use an accurate and straight balance.
    183. “And do not scant peoples’ goods and chattels, nor devalue what is valuable, nor create discord, spreading corruption on earth.
    184. “And be pious to Allah and entertain the profound reverence due to Him Who brought you and brought all the earliest people.”
    185. (But their response was pitifully unfavorable.) They said to him, “You are one of those bewitched.”
    186. They added, “You are only a mortal like us (therefore you could not be singled out for prophethood). In fact, we do think you are one of the liars.
    187. “And if you are not, and you are indeed declaring the truth, then let us see if you can cause lumps of heaven to fall upon us.”
    188. “Allah my Lord,” Shu`ayb said, “is All-Powerful, and He is fully cognizant of all that you do (and He will inflict punishment upon you).”
    189. They disbelieved him and refused to give credence to Our message. Therefore they were seized with a wave of suffocating heat followed by a cumulus that overshadowed them (and gave them a rainbow of hope of relief). It spoke thunder and destroyed them. It was indeed a torment that befell them on a Tremendous Day.
    190. This is, indeed, a sign of Allah’s omnipotence and authority, but most of them were not believers.
    191. Allah your Lord is, indeed, The Ever-Almighty, The Ever-Merciful.
    192. And this Qur’an is, indeed, a sending down of divine knowledge, sent down in succession to man from Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    193. It is brought down by Allah’s command by the trustworthy Holy Spirit Jibril (Gabriel),
    194. Who imparted it, Muhammad, to your heart so that you serve as a warning.
    195. The Qur’an is revealed in an evident Arabic language.
    196. And it was, indeed, referred to and proclaimed in the Scriptures of earlier (prophets).
    197. Is it not a sign to its credit and a ground for belief that the learned among the Children of Isra'il do know it (is the truth)?
    198. Had We sent it down to a people foreign to the Arabic tongue,
    199. And had he read it to them, they would not have understood it or welcomed it or believed in it.
    200. Thus do We insert in the hearts of the criminals (who grow daily more and more wicked),
    201. Who will not believe in it as the truth until they see the painful torment.
    202. A torment that comes to them suddenly and catches them unawares.
    203. They will say, “Can we be given respite (so that we correct all the wrongs)?”
    204. Do they (mockingly and defiantly) wish to hasten Our retributive torment?
    205. Do you see, Muhammad, into what would happen if We make them enjoy life for years?
    206. Then they are suddenly seized with what they were promised of torment?
    207. There and then never will their possessions (and the use of all that afforded them pleasure) and advantages avail them against Allah’s decreed torment!
    208. In fact, We never caused a town with its inhabitants to perish before they have had their signs and warnings (to which they did not listen).
    209. We mercifully sent warnings to make them wake up to the fact that there is the God, the Creator of the worlds (Who exacts reverence and veneration and obedience from all created beings). And never were We unjust.
    210. And such divine discourse as the Qur’an cannot be brought down by Ash-Shayatiin (the devils).
    211. Nor is it befitting them (that they be employed by Allah in conveying His sacred message), nor can they do that.
    212. They are altogether excluded from hearing. (In fact, it is quite beyond their limit of audition.)
    213. Therefore, do not invoke another god besides Allah, lest you should join those who will suffer torment.
    214. And warn, Muhammad, your next and near kin.
    215. And be kindly disposed to those who believed and followed you, and take them under your wing.
    216. But should they disobey you (then they will have disobeyed Allah). Then say to them, Muhammad, “I am innocent of all that you do.”
    217. And put your trust in The Ever-Almighty, The Ever-Merciful,
    218. Who sees you when you stand alone in the act of praying (and while doing benevolent deeds),
    219. And sees your change of position and variation of posture among the assemblage as they prostrate in worship (when you lead them in prayer).
    220. He is indeed The All-Hearing, The All-Knowing. 
    221. (In refutation of the disbelievers’ allegations,) Allah says: Shall I tell you on whom Ash-Shayatiin (the devils) descend?
    222. They descend only on every vicious liar who intentionally asserts what is false and attributes it to Allah.
    223. [Those] who open their ears to misrepresentations and vanities and to what the devils impart to them of falsities. And most of them (those who relate and those who receive) are liars.
    224. (Refuting the disbelievers’ allegations that the Qur’an is nothing but poetry,) Allah says: And the poets are followed by the misguided.
    225. Do you not see that they wander the trackless realms of every valley (of emotion, imagination, and discourse)?
    226. And (their words do not accord with their deeds;) they say what they do not do,
    227. Excepting those of them who believe in Allah and do righteous deeds. They often remember Allah and they are able to vindicate themselves and triumph over the enemies of Islam who have done injustice to them, and the unjust will come to know what kind of overturning destiny awaits them.

