SURAH 27
AN-NAML
The Ants
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah is Makkan and has 93 verses.
    It starts by vocal letters to draw the attention to the status of the Qur’an, which is similar to the speech of the Arabs, yet they could not emulate it. Moreover, these letters are intended to draw the attention of those who would not listen to the Qur’an. After this, the surah gives an account of the story of Musa (Moses) and mentions some of his miracles. Then it narrates the story of Dawud (David) and his son Sulayman (Solomon) and how the jinn, humans, and birds were subjected to Sulayman, and how he understood the language of the animals, and how grateful he was for this blessing. The surah then narrates the incident of the absence of the hoopoe and its narration of the story of Balqis and how she and her people worshiped the sun. Then the surah tells us how Sulayman sent a message to her, and how she replied with a gift after she consulted her courtiers. Then her throne was brought to Sulayman by one who had knowledge of the Book. When she entered the palace of Sulayman, she was astonished and, consequently, she declared her obedience to him and belief in Allah.
    The surah also narrates the story of Salih with his people, that of Lut (Lot) with his people, and how he and his family were rescued, and how the debauched were destroyed. The surah also calls attention to the creation of the heavens and the earth as evidence of the omnipotence and oneness of Allah.
    The surah then points out the value of the Qur’an in the call to Allah, its rejection by the disbelievers, despite its being impossible to emulate. The surah then mentions that a beast will come out of the earth and say to people that they did not believe in Allah’s verses. Then the surah calls the attention to the universe and how all that is in it will be struck with horror when the trumpet is blown for resurrection. It deals with the earth and how its mountains pass-by like clouds, and finally it delineates for the Messenger the way of the call and how it is incumbent on him to praise Allah Almighty.
 
    1. T. (ta) S. (sin). (The surah opens with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.) These are verses of the Qur’an, the evident Book (so that you may recite them. It is a book expounding that which it includes).
    2. It is a guide leading mankind in their affairs, besides being joyful tidings to the believers,
    3. Who engage in the act of prayer and give zakah (poor-dues), and look at the hereafter with certitude.
    4. As to those who do not believe in the hereafter, We have adorned for them a brighter present and a happier destiny until they commit themselves to blundering.
    5. These are they who are destined to the odious torment (laid upon the damned). They are the biggest losers in the hereafter.
    6. And you, Muhammad, do receive the Qur’an, sent down to you, from The Originator of all knowledge, Who is the Ever-Wise and the All-Knowing.
    7. On his way back to Egypt, Musa said to his family, “I have just perceived a fire. (You stay here,) I might be able to fetch you some information (about the direction we pursue) or fetch you a flaming brand to warm you up.”
    8. And when he reached the destined spot, he was called to and was told, “Blessed be those who are in the fire and those around (that is, the angels and Musa) and extolled are the glorious attributes of Allah, the Lord of the worlds (the visible and the invisible, past, present, and those to come).”
    9. “O Musa,” (the voice continued,) “I am Allah and it is only I, The Ever-Almighty, the Ever-Wise.”
    10. “Cast down your staff,” He said to Musa. And when Musa saw it moving as though it were a jinn, he withdrew and did not return. But he was told, “O Musa, do not be afraid, for My messengers fear naught close to Me,
    11. “Except him who has unjustly deviated from My command. But he exchanged, thereafter, the odious for what is good. He and such persons will find that I am, indeed, Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.”
    12. Allah said, “Put your hand into your bosom; it will come out unhurt and transfigured in a radiance of white divine light, one of nine divine signs you will present to Pharaoh and his people, who have been an immoral people.” 
    13. And when Our divine convincing signs were presented to them, they said, “this is evident sorcery” 
    14. Unjustly and exaltingly, they refused to accept these signs as emblematic of the truthfulness of the messenger, notwithstanding that they had a perception of the truth in their innermost selves. And you can see how fatal was the consequence which united the corruptors.
    15. And We brought Dawud (David) and Sulayman [Solomon] (divine) knowledge (for which they were grateful), and said, “Praise be to Allah, Who has graced us with what is beyond the common advantages of others of His believing bondmen.”
    16. And then Sulayman inherited Dawud’s kingdom, and prophethood, and there he said: “O mankind, we have been gracefully taught the language of the birds and we have been granted by Allah something of everything, and this is, indeed, His evident grace (effecting the end for which it is given).”
    17. And to Sulayman were gathered his hosts embodying arrays of the jinn, the men, and the birds marshaled (in proper order and submission).
    18. And when they reached the valley of the ants (where ants formed a great number of communities), one ant said to the rest, “O ants, enter your dwellings so that Sulayman and his hosts do not crush you unawares.”
    19. And there did Sulayman smile and at once he prayed, “O Allah my Lord, I beseech You to make me grateful for Your favor and blessing and Your beneficent gift that you bestowed on me and my parents. Help me do righteous deeds that satisfy you, and in mercy to me, admit me, O Allah my Lord, into the realm of those of Your righteous bondmen.”
    20. And he reviewed the birds (and mustered them), only to find one missing. He said, “Why do I not see the hoopoe, or has he been among the absentees?
    21. “I will torment him severely, or I will slay him unless he gives me an evident excuse!”
    22. And there and not far came the hoopoe into view and said, “I have learned something that you have not encompassed, and I have brought you some truthful news from the kingdom of Saba’.
    23. “I have found that a woman ruling over them and all things abound with her and she has a magnificent throne.
    24. “I found that she and her people prostrate to the sun apart from Allah. And Satan has adorned their deeds to them and barred them from the way; so they are not guided.
    25. “They do not prostrate to Allah, Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows all that people conceal and all that they make public.
    26. “Allah, there is no god but Him, The Absolute Sovereign, The Lord of the Magnificent Throne.”*
    27. And there Sulayman said, “We will see whether you have stated the truth sincerely or you are (one) of the liars!
    28. “Take this letter of mine and drop it in the palace, then turn away from them to see what kind of response they return.”
    29. The queen said to her counselors, “O chiefs, I have just received an honorable letter, which has been cast into my quarters.
    30. “It is from Sulayman (and it reads), ‘In the Name of Allah, The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    31. “‘Do not get exalted against me and I expect you to come to me with submissive reverence for Allah.’”
    32. She said to them, “O chiefs, I seek counsel from you in this matter. I never decided upon a course of action before you bear witness.”
    33. They said, “We are people who have great power and vehement readiness for war, but it rests in you to decide what you command.”
-------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    34. “The problem is,” she said, “that when kings make entry into a country to take possession of the land, they corrupt it and they humble its superiors (and render them inferior), and this is what they do!
    35. “I have resolved to send Sulayman and his people a present and wait to see what the emissaries bring back.”
    36. And when the envoys presented Sulayman with the present, he said, “Do you supply me with wealth? What Allah has brought me of His grace that abounds in me far excels all that He has brought you. In fact, it is you people who would rejoice with such a gift (because you know nothing except worldly gains).
    37. “Go back to them. We will confront them with such hosts as they can never withstand and drive them away belittled and humiliated.”
    38. Then he said to the chiefs of his assemblage of the men and the jinn, “Who among you can bring me her throne before they come to me with low submissive reverence for Allah (as Muslims)?”
    39. “I can bring it right here,” said (a `Ifrit) a very strong jinn, “before you assume the standing position and I am powerful enough to be trusted for such an undertaking.”
    40. But he who had knowledge of the Scriptures (and power conferred on him by Allah) said, “I will bring it to you before the time taken in twinkling your eye.” And when Sulayman found the throne set right secure before him, he prayed, “This is indeed an instance of the grace of Allah conferred on me to try whether I will propound gratitude or ingratitude. And he who is grateful, he but is grateful for his own interest, and he who sets himself in disbelief in my Lord, Allah must realize that Allah is Ever-Affluent and Beneficent.”
    41. Sulayman then said to his chiefs, “Disguise her throne to see whether she will be able to be guided to recognize it or she will be one of those who are not guided.”
    42. And when she came she was asked, “Is your throne like this?” “It (certainly) looks as if it were it,” she said. “And with Allah’s mercy and grace,” said Sulayman (to his retinue), “we were given the divine knowledge, long before her, and by consequence we are Muslims.”
    43. What barred her from paying reverence to Allah and induced her to revere other objects, she was one of a disbelieving people.
    44. As the honored guest of Sulayman, she was invited to enter the palace, and as she did, she reckoned the brilliant floor was a pool (and she drew up the hem of her clothes uncovering both her shanks), but there she was told that that was not water but a tower paved with slabs of glass. There and then she paused and declared, “O Allah my Lord, I have done injustice to myself, and here and as of now I exercise with Sulayman submissive reverence in Islam for Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”
    45. And We sent to Thamud their brother Salih to exhort them to pay submissive worship for Allah, but they were divided among themselves into two groups adversaries against each other.
    46. Salih said to those who disbelieved him (and challenged his warnings), “O my people, why do you defiantly wish odious deeds be hastened on rather than fair ones? If only you invoke Allah’s forgiveness He might extend His mercy to you.”
    47. But they wickedly said, “We take you and those with you as evil omen (presaging some direful events).” “Indeed,” he said, “events portending good or evil and all that is destined to happen rest in the Providence of Allah; the fact is that you are people put to the temptation.”
    48. Among the leaders in Salih’s city were nine men (of a clan); they flourished at spreading corruption in the land (and at creating discord) and would not act righteously.
    49. They mutually resolved under oath to launch an attack upon Salih and his family by night to finish them off, and then declare their innocence to his patron. They would say, “We were never present at the scene of the perishing of his family, and we are sincere.”
    50. And with scheming in circumventing, they had recourse to stratagem, and in Our scheme We also had recourse to stratagem, which they were unaware.
    51. And now, Prophet, look at the fatal consequences of their scheming. We simply destroyed them and their people.
    52. And you can see how their houses stand dilapidated over hills of ruin as a sequel to their iniquities, disbelief, (and harboring of evil for their Prophet). This is emblematic indeed of Allah’s omnipotence and authority and a significant sign for a people who know.
    53. And We saved those of Salih’s people whose hearts believed and were pious (and avoided disobeying Allah’s command).
    54. (And in a similar manner did We deal with the people of Lut [Lot]), who said to them, “O my people, do you commit such an obscenity when you discern (what is moral from that which is morally evil)?
    55. “Certainly, you have lust for men in lieu of women; you are a people who are indeed ignorant and indeed impudent.”
    56. And what was the answer of his people other than to say, “Drive the house of Lut out of your town. They are a folk who purify themselves.”
    57. And We saved him and his family, but not his wife, whom We decided was among those destined to be of the laggards (left behind to be destroyed by torment with the disbelievers).
    58. We rained down upon them a direful rain (of fire and brimstone). How odious and devastating was the rain on the heads of those who defiantly ignored Allah’s warning!
    59. (O Messenger, declare the praise of Allah and make a return to Him in evidence of obligation thus) Say: “To You, Allah, do I express my praise.” And pray and beseech Him for peace that it be extended to those of His bondmen worshipers whom He elected to convey His message. Ask the disbelievers, “Who is Most Charitable, Allah or those who are helpless whom they associate with Him?”
    60. Ask them, Messenger, “Who was He Who created the heavens and the earth, and caused rain water to fall from heaven to serve as the means of causing beautiful orchards to grow—an action proper to Allah alone! If you people had tried hard to cause the trees thereof to grow, (you would have utterly failed). Is this not an action exclusively peculiar to Allah? Or is it to a god (associated) with Him?” Yet they are a people who (ignorantly and impudently) place the objects they worship (false gods) as equal to Allah!
    61. Who was He Who set the earth at creation in the order of a reposing habitation (where you established your abode), and He made amidst it rivers and placed in it mountains in a certain setting, fixed as with an anchor, and installed a natural partition between the two seas (the fresh and the salt)? Was it another god with the Almighty Allah? The truth is that most of them do not know.
    62. Ask them, Messenger, “Who is He who answers the invocation of the distressed when he invokes His help and sets him free from what caused him odious misery, and Who makes you succeed those who came to this world before you? Is it a god (associated) with Allah? How little, indeed, you remember Allah!
    63. “Who guides you in the darkness on land and at sea, and Who sends the wind as a forerunner of His mercy, heralding a joyful event? Is it  a god with Allah? Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely far beyond all those they associate with Him.
    64. “And Who begins creation and brings it back (and creates and recreates)? Who provides you with your livelihood from heaven above you and from the earth below you? Is it another god with Allah? If so, then produce your proof if, indeed, you are sincerely declaring the truth!”
    65. Say to them, Messenger, “No one ever knows the unseen nor what the future holds in the heavens and on earth but Allah alone, and never are they unaware when they will be resurrected to face judgment!”
    66. Their knowledge of the hereafter has reached a deadlock, and is insignificant. They are in doubt about it. In fact, they are willfully blind to it.
    67. And yet the disbelievers still say, “Do you mean that after we and our fathers have been reduced to dust, we can be brought out and resurrected!
    68. “We have been promised that before, and so have our fathers. This is, indeed, nothing but myths of old.”
    69. Say to them, Messenger, “Travel in the land and see for yourselves the fatal end that united all those who persisted in crime.”
    70. And do not be grieved at heart for their denial of the divine message, nor should you be sorely straitened on account of their scheming. (Allah will eventually vindicate you.)
    71. And in their challenge to the occurrence of punishment they say, “When will that promised punishment come to pass if, indeed, you are sincerely declaring the truth!”
    72. Say to them, Messenger, “It is hoped that some of what you have been promised and seek to be hastened on may overtake you now.”
    73. Indeed, the grace of Allah your Lord abounds in people, but most of them do not thank Him.
    74. Allah your Lord is All-Knowing, indeed, of all the private thoughts and feelings that are stored in their breasts and of all that they conceal. And He is All-Knowing of all that they make public (and will punish them for their evil sayings and deeds).
    75. And there is nothing of the unseen in the heavens or on earth but it is recorded in an evident Book.
    76. Indeed, this Qur’an narrates to the Children of Isra'il of what was included in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and informs them of the truth of most of the that about which they differ.
    77. It is a guidance and mercy to the believers.
    78. Allah your Lord will judge between them (on the Day of Judgment) with justice and equity. He is The Ever-Almighty, The All-Knowing.
    79. And so, Messenger, put your trust in Allah. You are upon the evident Truth.
    80. But you will not be able to make the dead hear, nor will you be able to make the call reach those who turn a deaf ear, when they withdraw turning their backs.
    81. Nor will you be able to guide the blind out of their error. You can make none hear except those who believe in Our signs and are Muslims.
    82. And when time of Allah’s predetermined Hour befalls the disbelievers, We make a beast from the earth come out to speak with them and say to them, “Mankind had no certitude in Our signs.”
    83. The Day will come when We muster from every nation a group of those who cried lies to Our signs. They will be duly dispensed,
    84. Until they have all assembled before Him for judgment. Then He will say to them, “Did you not cry lies to My signs, or did you not encompass them in knowledge? What was it you were doing?”
    85. And now that what was predicted as a reaction to their iniquities befalls them, they are stricken dumb (unable to put forward a plea, neither in abatement nor in bar of an action or prosecution).
    86. Did they not see that We made for them a period of darkness (the night) to take their natural repose, and a period filled with light (the day) to have clear perception of things? These are signs for people who believe.
    87. The Day will come when the trumpet is blown (by the angel Israfil, indicative of resurrection and judgment), and there will all those in the heavens and all those on earth be alarmed with startling intense horror, except those whom Allah will exempt as He wills, and all will be brought before Him in object submission.
    88. And you see the mountains. You think they are motionless while, in fact, they move as fast as the clouds, (when driven by the wind). This is the work of Allah, Who consummated everything (He created). He is All-Cognizant of all that you perform.
    89. He who comes with a fair deed, will have a better reward and will be exempt from the alarming occasion of the exciting intense horror, that Day feeling safe and secure.
    90. And he whose deeds are odious will be cast in Hell headlong with his damnable face downward, and be told, “Are you not recompensed but with (what is commensurate) with your deeds?”
    91. Say to them, Messenger, “I have been commanded to worship and serve Allah, the Lord and the Supreme Master of this town (Makkah), which He made inviolable and to Whom belong the whole and all in all, and I have been commanded to be one of the Muslims.
    92. “I have also been commanded to recite the Qur’an (to be meaningful to the people).” Then he who is steered by the spirit of truth and Providence is his guide benefits for himself. And just say to him who errs and strays from the path of righteousness, Messenger, “I am only (a witness and) a warning.”
    93. And say to them, “Praise be to Allah and extolled are His glorious attributes. He will exhibit to you His authoritative divine signs (and His marvels), which you will inevitably recognize. Allah your Lord is not heedless of all that you do.”
