SURAH 28
AL-QASAS
The Narratives
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah, “The Narratives” was revealed at Makkah except for a few of its 88 verses.
    It includes details of what has been mentioned before in general about the story of Musa (Moses), since he was born during the reign of Pharaoh, who killed the male children of the Children of Isra’il, but there should be from among them a prophet that ends his authority.
    Then the surah mentions how Musa was raised up in the house of Pharaoh until Musa fled from Egypt to Madyan in the Levant, and how he returned with his wife, the daughter of Prophet Shu`ayb.
    Following this the surah narrates how Allah spoke with Musa on his way back and selected him for messengership. Then there is the story of Pharaoh and his magicians with Musa until Allah drowned Pharaoh and his troops, and saved Musa and those who followed him from among the Children of Isra’il. After this there is the story of the Children of Isra’il with Musa and his brother Harun (Aaron), and the stories relevant to the news of the disbelievers, such as the story of Qarun (Korah) and those disbelievers who preceded him. For this comprehensive statement, the surah was named “The Narratives.”

    1. T (ta). S (sin). M (mim). The surah opens with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. These are clearly spoken verses (flowing) of the Evident Book.
    3. Here, We recite to you, Messenger, in truth some tiding relative to Musa (Moses) and Pharaoh to relate it to the people who have believed (so that they may find truth in them).
    4. Pharaoh exalted himself in the land (in the office of tyranny), and divided the people into sects and leaned heavily against one of them, brutally slaying their newborn males and purposely sparing their females. He was, indeed, mischievous, causing corruption.
    5. And We decided to be kind and bounteous to those who were deemed weak in the land and to make them leaders into goodness and make them inherit the land.
    6. We decided to establish them firmly in the land and confront Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts with what they were wary might happen to them (at the hands of a newborn from among the Israelites).
    7. We revealed to Musa’s mother thus: “Breast-feed him until you feel that fear falls upon you for his life, then put him in a chest and cast him into the main and do not be afraid nor grieve. We will bring him back to you and make him one of the Emissaries.”
    8. There he was picked up by the household of the Pharaoh, who did not realize that he would be their enemy who would cause them grief. Pharaoh, Haman, and their hosts were, indeed, sinners.
    9. And there, Pharaoh’s wife said to Pharaoh as she saw the child, “A comfort and joy to the eye for me and you.” (She ordered the guards,) “Do not kill him. He might bring about good or advantage, or we might adopt him as a son.” And they were totally unaware (of what the future held).
    10. Meanwhile, Musa’s mother was left with (a heart-sight) an empty intellect; she almost declared him had We not braced her heart to be one of the believers.
    11. The mother said to his sister, “Trail him and keep track.” And his sister saw him at a distance so that Pharaoh’s people were unaware.
    12. And We had already prohibited him breast-feeding from all the women who were available to suckle and nurse a strange child. His sister said, “Shall I tell you of a household who would sponsor him and take good care of him for you?”
    13. And there We turned him back to his mother so that she would comfort her eye and not grieve, and to know that the promise of Allah is true, even though most people do not know.
    14. And when Musa reached maturity and was capable of fulfilling the obligation and the trust, We bestowed on him an exalted position. We brought him judgment and divine knowledge. Thus do We recompense the fair-doers.
    15. He entered the city unnoted by its people only to find two men fighting, one of the same sect and the other of his enemy (an Egyptian). His co-religionist sought his help against their enemy, and there Musa cuffed him with the fists and the man dropped dead. There and then Musa said, “This is the work of Satan, who is an evident enemy leading into error.”
    16. And he invoked Allah’s mercy and forgiveness: “O Allah my Lord, I have done injustice to myself. Forgive me, Allah, and have mercy on me.” Allah forgave him and extended to him His mercy. He is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    17. And he added, “O Allah my Lord, since You have favored me, I promise I will never be a backer of the criminals.”
    18. From then on he came to be apprehensive of impending danger (expecting at any moment to be arrested and prosecuted and either tortured or killed). And in this state of anxiety and fear he met his same co-religionist whom he had vindicated the day before screaming for his help today. Musa said to him, “You are, indeed, a misguided fellow (alienated from Allah).”
    19. Nevertheless, he felt like assulting the man who was their enemy, but when Musa made the attempt the man said to him, “Would you like, Musa, to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You seem to be eager to exercise power and to play the potentate in the land and not to be one of the reformers.”
    20. Meantime, there speedily came a man from the far end of the city. He said to Musa, “The chiefs are conspiring upon killing you; therefore, you had better leave the city. I am offering you sincere advice.”
    21. Musa took the man’s advice and left the city in a state of anxiety and fear. Feeling helpless, he invoked Allah for help thus: “Protect me, O Allah my Lord, and save me from the people who are unjust wrongdoers.”
    22. Journeying toward Madyan he said to himself, “Perhaps Allah my Lord will guide me to the right way.”
    23. And as he arrived at the water of Madyan, he found a large crowd of people watering their flocks. Among them he found two women trying to keep back their flocks. He asked them, “What is your trouble?” “We cannot water our flocks,” they said, “until the shepherds have driven off their flocks, and our father is quite an old man.”
    24. Musa watered their flocks for them, then turned away to the shade and prayed, “O Allah my Lord, with all Your grace that abounds in me I am still in need.”
    25. Then, one of the two women came back walking with a womanly shyness. She said to him, “My father invites you to recompense you with the reward (for the service you rendered to us), watering our flocks.” And when he went and met with the father and narrated to him his story, the father said to him, “Do not be afraid; you have already gotten off safely from the unjust people.”
    26. And there, said one of the women to her father, “Would you hire him, father, for the best you can hire is the man who is strong and worthy of trust.”
    27. The father said to Musa, “I would like to offer you one of my daughters in marriage on condition that you serve me for eight years; and should you like to make them ten, it will be of your own accord. I do not like to make things arduous for you, and you will find me, Allah willing, one of the righteous.”
    28. “This,” he added, “is an agreement between me and you; whichever of the two terms be fulfilled, there shall be no hostility or ill-will to me, and Allah is a Trustee over what we say.”
    29. And when Musa had accomplished the term agreed upon and departed with his family, he perceived a fire on the mountain side of Tur (Tor). He said to his family, “I have just perceived a fire; you stay here. Perhaps I might be able to get some information (relative to the direction we pursue) or fetch you a brand from the burning wood (to kindle a fire) to warm you.”
    30. And when he reached the fire, he was called to from the blessed spot of the tree on the right side of the valley: “O Musa, it is I, Allah, Lord of the worlds (the visible and the invisible, the past, the present, and those to come).”
    31. “Cast your staff,” Allah said to him. When Musa saw it moving as though it were a jinn, he withdrew in the face of danger and did not return. “Come back, Musa,” he was told, “and do not be afraid. You are, indeed, one of those who are secure.”
    32. “Insert your hand,” he was told, “into your bosom and it will come out white without any odious harm; and clasp to you your arm to put off fear. These are two divine proofs (evincing both My omnipotence and authority) to present to Pharaoh and his chiefs, for they have been an immoral people.”
    33. And there said Musa, “O Allah my Lord, I killed one of them and I fear they might kill me (in retribution).
    34. “My brother Harun (Aaron) is more eloquent than I am. Send him, Allah, with me to be a support and to confirm my cause, for I fear they might cry me lies.”
    35. Allah said, “We will strengthen your arm by your brother Harun, and We will impart to you divine power and authority so that they will not be able to harm you both. Victory will be for you both and your followers.”
    36. And when Musa presented to them Our convincing divine signs, they said, “This is, indeed, nothing but witchcraft fabricated (for deception). We never heard of such things from our earliest fathers.”
    37. “It is only Allah, my Lord” said Musa, “Who knows who came with guidance from His Providance, and He knows those who are destined to win the bliss in the hereafter when the unjust will not prosper.”
    38. And here Pharaoh said to his chiefs: “O, you chiefs, I never knew a god (whom you revered and venerated) but myself. Therefore, kindle for me, Haman (his grand vizier), the molded bricks of clay with fire and erect for me a lofty building (soaring skyward), so that I might find the means of viewing the God of Musa, whom I think a great liar.”
    39. And there did Pharaoh and his troops turn indignant and unjustly proud in the land and they surmised that they would never be brought back to Us.
    40. Consequently, We seized him and his hosts and flung them into the sea, and you can see the fatal consequence of the unjust wrongdoers.
    41. And We made them leaders calling to the Fire, and no vindication whatever will they receive on the Day of Resurrection.
    42. And We made a curse to follow them;  a curse here in this life and in the hereafter when they will be spurned.
    43. And after We had caused the earlier generations to perish, We gave Musa the Book (the Tawrah) to serve as divine enlightenment to mankind and a spirit of truth guiding to all truth and a mercy extended by Allah so that they may remember.
    44. You, Muhammad, were not at the western side of Mount Tur at the time We imparted to Musa the divine knowledge and entrusted him with the Book and empowered him to do the Command, nor were you a witness of the event. (Then why do your people hold you a liar while you narrate to them the news of previous people?)
    45. Not only that, but since then We have brought into being generations over the years and it is an age since then that people have forgotten the covenants they ratified. Nor did you live among the people of Madyan to recite Our signs! But We sent Messengers.
    46. Nor were you at the side of the Mount At-Tur when We called to Musa, but it is the mercy of Allah your Lord extended to you to serve as a warning to a people who never received a Warner before you, that they may, it is hoped, remember.
    47. If We had not sent you, Muhammad, to the people, particularly to the pagans, to serve as a sign and a warning, they would have said when befallen with an affliction for what their hands had forwarded, “O Allah our Creator, if only You had sent to us a messenger to guide us to Your signs and be of the believers.
    48. And now when you have received the Qur’an from Allah they say, “If only the Messenger were given divine signs similar to those given to Musa!” Did they not disbelieve the signs We brought Musa before? And did they not say that both the Tawrah of Musa and the Qur’an as two kinds of sorcery backing each other, and they said, “In each we are disbelievers.”
    49. Say to them, Muhammad, “(If, indeed, you are declaring the truth,) then bring down from Allah a Book that is a better guide and I follow it, if you are sincere.”
    50. And if they do not respond to you, then you will know, Muhammad, that they simply follow their own prejudices. And who is more erroneous than him who yields to his prejudices without guidance from Allah! Allah does not guide the unjust wrongdoers.
    51. We have already conveyed to them the divine Word (to guide them into all truth) that they may remember.
    52. And those to whom We gave the Book before this Book (the Jews and the Christians) do believe in it, (acknowledge the Qur’an and the truth of your divine mission).
    53. When it is recited to them they express their thoughts in words thus: “We do believe in Allah’s divine words represented in the Qur’an, for it reflects the divine truth; long before the Qur’an we were Muslims.”
    54. Such persons will be requited in double for their suffering (and for enduring pain and hostilities, for their constancy in labor, exertion, and effort), and they repel an odious deed by a fair one; and they spend in benevolence and benefaction of what We provisioned them.
    55. When they hear idle talk, gossip, or slander, they refrain from listening and turn away and say, “We are responsible for our deeds and you are responsible for yours; peace be upon you. We do not seek the ignorant.”
    56. You, Messenger, will not be able to guide to Allah’s path whom you love, but Allah guides to His path of righteousness whom He wills, and He knows best those who are rightly-guided.
    57. And the disbelievers say to you, “If we should follow your exhortation, we will be snatched from our land (and be robbed of our rights and privileges)!” Did We not establish for them on a sanctuary secured against violation or encroachment? We caused the flow of all kinds of fruits and the products of everything to its environ—a livelihood provided by Us albeit most of them do not know this fact.
    58. How many towns did We cause to perish after Our grace was made to abound in them and they met it with dissatisfaction and ingratitude! There you can see how their dwellings were left desolate thereafter and destitute of inhabitants but of a few, and We were the inheritors!
    59. And never did Allah your Lord cause the towns to perish until He had sent a messenger to their mother-town to recite to the people Our divine revelations. Therefore, never did We destroy the towns except when they proved themselves unjust wrongdoers.
    60. You people had better realize that whatever you have been granted of material advantages is simply the enjoyment of life (and its temporal and mundane things); whereas all that is with Allah affords eternal charity (and surpassing pleasure). Do you not consider?
    61. You people just think and think but this: Does he whom We promised Our efficacious grace and who will find that it has effected the end for which it was given compare with him whom We made enjoy the material advantages of life here and then he finds himself among those brought for judgment on the Day of Resurrection?
    62. There and then will Allah ask them, “Where are My assumed partners whom you associated with Me?”
    63. And there, those against whom the Word has been  fulfilled will say, “O Allah our Lord, it is these whom we misguided as we were misguided. We declare our innocence of them to you. In fact it was not us they really worshiped!”
    64. And the followers will be told, “Call to your associates.” And they will, but no answer will they receive from them, and they will see the torment and they will all wish they had pursued the path of righteousness (the path of Allah).
    65. This is the Day when Allah will call them in question: “What kind of response did you give to the messengers?
    66. But all information and news will be blindly eclipsed to them, and will not ask each other.
    67. However, he who humbly repented and believed in Allah’s supremacy, omnipotence, and authority and whose deeds were righteous may be among the prosperers.
    68. And Allah your Lord creates what He wills and chooses what He wills and whom He wills; whereas, the disbelievers and people at large have no choice. Extolment be to Him. He is infinitely Exalted above all they associate with Him.
    69. And Allah your Lord is All-Knowing, indeed, of what their breasts keep secret, and He is All-Knowing of all that they make public.
    70. And He is Allah, there is no god but Him. Praise be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes here and in the hereafter. To Him belong the judgment. (Supremacy is His attribute,) and to Him will all of you be brought back.
    71. Say to them, Messenger, “What if Allah makes the night unceasing to the Day of Resurrection? Who is the god besides Him who will be able to restore for you daylight? Will you people hear?”
    72. Say to them, “What if Allah makes the daytime unceasing to the day of Resurrection? Who is the god besides Him who will be able to restore for you the night in which you rest? Will you not behold?”
    73. But in mercy to you people, He caused the night and the day to vary in duration and undergo constant alternation and successions so that you take your rest and to accomplish your objects sought after of His bounty, that you may be thankful.
    74. The Day will come when He questions the disbelievers. He will call them, “Where are My associates whom you presumed?”
    75. And We will draw out to witness one from each nation (their messenger) to give evidence (in relation to the worldly matters), and We will question the disbelievers as to their proof (of the validity of their gods whom they had associated with Allah). But they will fail to advance any proof and they will realize that Allah alone is and has always been the Truth manifest. Here and now they are erring and forsaken by those who they fabricated about what shared with Him His divine nature and supremacy.
    76. Qarun (Korah) was one of Musa's people who exercised iniquity and injustice toward his people. We bestowed on him such immense treasures that the keys (of the chambers where the treasures were hidden) would have been an immense burden for a host of strong men to carry. His people said to him, “Do not exult, for Allah does not like those who exult (vaingloriously of what they are made to possess).”
    77. “And betake yourself,” they added, “with what Allah has bestowed on you the home of the Hereafter , and do not forget your share of worldly enjoyment of what is lawful, and be fairly disposed and benevolent to others as Allah has been to you, and do not pursue corruption nor create discord on earth. Allah does not love the corruptors.”
    78. But Qarun said, “This has been brought to me by reason of the knowledge with me.” Did he not know that Allah had caused to perish before him people who were stronger and greater in affluence? However, there is no need to question the criminals.
    79. And so he came out before his people in a splendid adornment, and there exclaimed those who were absorbed in the vanities of this world, “We wish we were given the like of the riches Qarun was made to possess. He is the owner of a tremendous fortune.”
    80. Whereas those gifted with divine knowledge exclaimed, “Woe betide you people of vanities! The requital conferred by Allah in the hereafter is more charitable for him who believes and does righteous deeds. This will be attained by the patient.”
    81. So We caved him in and his home, and he had no community to vindicate him against Allah; neither did he vindicate himself.
    82. And those who had coveted his status the day before exclaimed then, “Goodness! It is evident that Allah gives livelihood generously and confers support gratuitously to whom He wills of His bondmen, and He gives with restraint and by measure to whom He wills. Had He not been gracious, He would have caved us in. Goodness! It is evident that those who disbelieve in Allah do not really prosper.”
    83. In (the Last Home) the world to come, We simply reserve that home for those who do not seek exaltation in the land. A happy ending is to those in whose hearts reigns piety.
    84. He who comes with a fair deed will be rewarded with what is infinitely better than what is commensurate with his deed, and those who commit odious deeds will be requited only with what is commensurate with their deeds.
    85. He Who ordained on you the Qur’an, Messenger (which brought on you persecution and led you to go hence), will cause you to return. Say to the disbelievers, “Indeed, Allah my Lord knows best who comes with guidance and who is lost in the maze of error.”
    86. You, Messenger, never hoped the Book (the Qur’an) to be sent down and to be revealed to you, but it was only Allah’s mercy extended to you. Therefore, do not back up the disbelievers.
    87. Nor let them succeed in barring you from the Signs ('ayat) of Allah after they have been sent down to you; and call them to your Lord; and be not one of the associators .
    88. Nor should you invoke other deities with Allah; there is no god but Him. All created beings, the animate and the inanimate, will perish but not Him, the Creator of everything, Allah of Countenance and authority to Whom belongs the Judgment, the supremacy of the universe and to whom you will all be brought back.
