SURAH 29
AL-`ANKABUT
The Spider
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed in Makkah except for the first 11 of its 69 verses. It opens with indicating that the belief of the believers must be tried with hardships and striving in the cause of Allah to protect the state of truth and faith. Man was commanded to be dutiful to his parents and to strive in Allah’s cause in order that he may entertain the qualities of both charity and belief. Then the surah distinguishes between different kinds of people regarding faith, and points out that some of them merely express their belief in words, not in deeds. Then it refers to Nuh (Noah) and his striving with his people, and narrates some aspects of the call of Ibrahim (Abraham), and pinpoints the significance of this narration to the Prophet. Then it mentions the reply of Ibrahim’s people. It also refers to Lut and his story with his people, that Allah sent down some angels to annihilate his people and save his family except for his wife. Then Allah refers to the stories of Shu`ayb and the people of Madyan, Hud and the people of `Ad, Salih and the people of Thamud, and Qarun (Korah), Pharaoh, and Haman. It is clearly shown that the forces opposing Allah and trying to obstruct His cause have all in the end been doomed to disappointment and eventually to destruction. Allah shows that the argument of those who take other deities besides Allah is as weak as a spider’s house, indicating that these examples given in the Qur’an cannot be comprehended but by those who ponder.
    Then Allah commands His Prophet not to argue with the People of the Book except in a fair fashion employing the faculty of reason. He refers to the Prophet’s illiteracy, which adds to the evidence supporting his prophethood. Then Allah refers to the insistence of the disbelievers to witness material miracles, which they will deny, as did the people of Musa and others. Allah refers to their will to hasten on the promised punishment and assures them that it certainly will afflict them. Then Allah mentions the requital set for both the believers and the disbelievers on the Day of Judgment, and draws their attention to reflect on the universe and to Allah’s signs in it, and compares between life below and the hereafter. He points out that the disbelievers resort to Allah when they sense fear and turn their back to His Message when they feel secure. Then He mentions His grace upon them in the Inviolable House, which they denied, then He portrays the conditions of those who strive in the cause of Allah.

    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). The surah opens with these introductory letter from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. Do mankind think that just because they express their thoughts (in words and utter the two testaments) that they will be left untempted (with the hardships and duties that verify their belief? No, they will certainly be tested).
    3. Indeed, Allah tested the previous nations (with the hardships and duties to disclose what He already knew and to distinguish those who are true to their promises and their intentions) from those who prove themselves liars.
    4. Or do those who do odious deeds disobey Him think they will outstrip Us (and, consequently, Our punishment)? How erroneously they judge!
    5. He who hopes for Allah’s meeting and reward and fears His punishment, simply believes in the truth and must realize that that Day is, indeed, coming. And Allah is All-Hearing and All-Knowing.
    6. And he who strives in Allah’s cause to make Allah’s word uppermost, his reward for his striving is for himself. Allah is, indeed, Ever-Affluent (and Independent of all His created beings).
    7. And for those who believed and did righteous deeds, We will expiate for them their evil deeds and We will recompense them for every deed at the gauge of the best of what they did.
    8. And Allah commanded man to display to them a gentle and a fair companionship. Should they try to strive with you to associate other deities, of which you have no knowledge, with Allah, then refuse to accept and disobey them (in this respect). To Allah will all of creation return, and He will inform you all of all you did.
    9. And those who believed in Allah and His messages and done righteous deeds, Allah will admit to the righteous.
    10. Among mankind there is he who declares his belief in Allah. Yet when he is harmed in His cause, he does not think of the punishment inflicted by Allah in the hereafter, as if he equalizes suffering here in magnitude and degree with Allah’s punishment in the hereafter. And if Allah, your Lord, gives the Muslims victory over their enemies, he proclaims that he was with you (and claims his share of the booty). Does not Allah know what faith or hypocrisy people’s breasts store!
    11. And Allah definitely knows and distinguishes the believers from the hypocrites (and requite each according to his deeds).
    12. And the disbelievers say to those who are believers, “Follow our way, and in case you encounter resurrection and requital, we will hold ourselves responsible for your sins and morally accountable for your actions.” But, in fact, never will they bear the sins of others; they are, indeed, liars.
    13. But they will carry the burden of their wrongs and sinful actions added to the other burdens (of those they tried to mislead and distract from the truth); and there is much, indeed, to answer for on the Day of Resurrection for what they used to fabricate.
    14. Indeed, Allah sent Nuh (Noah) to his people to call them to acknowledge the oneness of Allah. He lingered among them a thousand years except fifty seasons, then they were inundated and swept away by the Deluge, for they were unjust to themselves.
    15. And Allah fulfilled His promise to Nuh and saved him and the believers who followed him on the Ark and made it a sign to the worlds.
    16. And remember, Messenger, Ibrahim (Abraham) when he called his people to worship Allah and to entertain the profound piety due to Him, and that faith will be much better for them (than disbelief), if only you knew.
    17. “Those you worship part from Allah,” he added, “are graven images (that you made by your hands), and this way you are, indeed, fabricating falsehood. Those you worship apart from Allah do not have the power to provide your livelihood; therefore, betake yourselves to Providence seeking His bounty for your livelihood and worship Him and be grateful to Him, and you will return to Him (and that He will requite you according to your deeds).
    18. “And should you keep crying lies, then many generations before you cried lies to their messengers (yet they in no way did they harm their messengers). The duty of the Messenger is only the evident proclamation.
    19. The disbelievers have seen and have known how Allah creates and re-creates. He starts creation and reproduces it; surely, that is easy for Allah.
    20. Say, Messenger, to the deniers, “Journey the land and see how Allah began creation (and look at the remains of those who were before you) to realize that it is Allah Who will originate the last creation, resurrection. He is, indeed, Ever-Determiner to accomplish all things.
    21. “He torments whom He wills (that is, those who denied resurrection) and extends mercy to whom He wills (that is, those who believed in resurrection). And to Him will all creation be turned over (for requital).
    22. “Nor are you deniers in a position to be defiant to Allah on earth or in heaven. Apart from Allah you have neither a Patron or a Vindicator.
    23. “And those who disbelieved in Allah’s divine signs attesting to His oneness and rejected His messengers and His divine revelations and the meeting before Him on the Day of Judgment and requital, have despaired of Allah’s mercy and will suffer painful torment.”
    24. And what was the answer of Ibrahim’s people to his admonition and exhortation when he called them to worship Allah alone and abandon worshiping the idols, but they said to each other to kill him or burn him. (And they threw him into fire,) but Allah saved him (and made the fire cool and safe for him.) This failure of their plan is clear evidence to people to believe in the oneness of Allah, clear evidence to people who believe.
    25. And Ibrahim said to his people, “Your worship of these graven images apart from Allah is false worship. This is amity in this low life. But on the Day of Resurrection the case will be changed. The leaders will deny and reject their followers, and the followers will curse the leaders, and you all will be destined to make your eternal abode in the Fire and there no one can help or vindicate you.
    26. And it was only Lut (Lot) who was the first to believe him and who accepted his message and said, “I am immigrating to the place where Allah commanded me to immigrate (and I dedicate my affectionate devotion to Allah my Creator, to Whom I betake myself), for He is The All-Mighty and The All-Wise.
    27. And Allah bestowed on Ibrahim Ishaq (Isaac, his son) and Ya`qub (Jacob, his grandson) and honored him by conferring on his progeny the prophethood and entrusted them with the divine Books. Indeed, Allah’s reward is given him in this life, and he will be among the righteous in the hereafter.
    28. And remember, Messenger, that We sent Lut to his people (and that he called them to acknowledge Allah’s oneness and obey Him), and condemned the obscenity that they committed which had never been practiced by any creature in the worlds.
    29. “What you practice is detested and destructive. You certainly have obscenity with men, with whom you practice sodomy and you commit immorality and abomination in your society (without either fear of Allah or shame from the people).” But his people did not listen to him; they only mocked at him and asked him to bring about Allah’s torment if, indeed, he was declaring the truth.
    30. And there, Lut resorted to Allah’s help and prayed Allah to afford him help and give him victory over these corruptors.
    31. And when Allah’s messengers, the angels, visited Ibrahim with the joyful tidings, they said to him that Allah had commanded them to destroy this town and its population because they have been unjust to themselves, (associating others with Allah and committing immoral acts).
    32. Ibrahim said to the angels, “But in it dwells Lut, (so how would you annihilate them?)” They told him that they know exactly who lives there and that they will deliver him and his family to safety, except for his wife, who will be among those destined to stay behind (to meet with the same fate of those destroyed for their disbelief and wrongdoings).
    33. And when the angel messengers went to Lut, he came to grief on their account, and their safety straitened him. But they assured him saying, “Do not be afraid, nor must you grieve. We will destroy this village and We will deliver you to safety along with your family, but not your wife, who will join company of those staying behind.
    34. “We are sent to execute Allah’s command to bring down from Heaven upon the people of this town a torturing chastisement in requital of their immorality.”
    35. Allah destroyed this village and made of (its relics) an evident sign of what Allah did and an example for people who consider.
    36. And to the people of Madyan Allah sent their brother a messenger from among themselves, Shu`ayb. He called them to acknowledge Allah’s system of faith and worship, and to hope for the Day of Judgment, seeking Allah’s rewards and blessings and not establishing corruption on earth.
    37. But they cried lies to him, and in consequence they were seized by the destructive Commotion (which destroyed them and) laid them prostrate and dead under the ruins of their homes.
    38. And remember, Messenger, that We also annihilated the people of `Ad and the people of Thamud, and the remains of their decayed and fallen dwellings and towns (stand for you people as the evidence of their fatal consequence). Satan adorned for them their evil acts (and they obeyed him). He barred them from the way, although they had perception.
    39. O Messenger, remind (those who are deceived by their riches and power) of the destruction We inflicted on Qarun (Korah), Pharaoh, and Haman (as it is Our Law regarding the deniers). Allah sent Musa to them and presented them with clear and plain evidences. But they displayed inordinate self-esteem and arrogance and waxed proud in the land. Nevertheless, they were not the first people to disbelieve.
    40. Allah penalized each of these nations that denied their messengers for their disbelief and guilty deeds. Among them were those against whom Allah sent a whirlwind and stones, and those who were overtaken by a merciless shout (blast), and those whom Allah caused to be swallowed by the yawning chasm in the earth He created beneath them, and those whom Allah drowned. This punishment was not unjust from Allah, but they did injustice to themselves.
    41. Those who take guardians or patrons other than Allah are like the spider making a home to seek protection. The spider’s home is, indeed, the feeblest of homes, if only the disbelievers knew.
    42. Indeed, Allah knows they invoke nothing apart from Him. He is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    43. Allah tells such similitudes to mankind and they are only considered by the knowledgeable. 
    44. (And besides the narratives, examples, and signs that Allah mentioned, there is another clear sign:) Allah created the heavens and the earth with the Truth. And this is indeed a sign for the believers.
    45. Recite, Prophet, all that has been revealed to you of the Book (the Qur’an), and establish prayer, for prayer forbids obscenity and maleficence. The Remembrance of Allah is greater.  And Allah knows all that you do, good and bad (and will requite you for it).
    46. And do not argue, you believers, with the Population of the Book (Jews and Christians), but in the fairest manner except for those of them who have been unjust. Say to them, “We believe in what has been sent down to us and what has been sent down to you in the Tawrah and Injil (the original Torah and Gospel as revealed to Musa [Moses] and `Isa [Jesus] respectively). Our God and yours is One and to Him we are Muslims.”
    47. And just as We revealed the Book to Messengers before you, Muhammad, We have sent down to you the Book (the Qur’an). Those among the People of the Book [Christians and Jews] (who applied their minds to the acquisition of learning and thought intently and reflected) will believe in the Qur’an. And this due recognition is shared by some of your people as well. And no one repudiates Our divine Signs (and rejects Our revelations after they have been evident and far from doubt) but those who insist on disbelief. 
    48. Had you, Muhammad, been a man who read books before the Qur’an and were able to express your feelings and your thoughts in writing (and transcribe it with your right hand), this would have raised suspicion among those wrong-doers.
    49. This Book (is not subject to suspicion,) but it is evident signs in the breasts of those who are well founded in knowledge (and know the facts). And no one repudiates Our revelations and signs except the unjust.
    50. And they (the disbelievers) say, “If only some convincing signs, like those sent to the messengers before him, would be sent to him from Allah his Lord!” Say to them, “Allah has all sorts of divine signs (evincing both His omnipotence and authority, and he will reveal them whenever He wills), but I am only sent as an evident warning.”
    51. Do they (the disbelievers) (suggest revealing such signs and do) not consider it enough that We have sent to you, Muhammad, the Book (the Qur’an), (which is the everlasting miracle throughout time,) to recite to them? This by itself reminds them of Allah’s mercy and blessings to them and the generations to come, and is a benignant reminder to a people who believe.
    52. Say to them, “Allah is enough to be a witness of the fact that I have conveyed to you that which was revealed to me to convey to you. He is All-Knowing of all that is in the heavens and of all that is on earth. And those who believe in the untruth and disbelieve in Allah are the losers.”
    53. And they (the disbelievers) challenge you, Muhammad, to hasten on the torment! Had it not been for a predetermined time set for their reckoning, their torment would have been planted now. But it will suddenly overtake them unaware (when least expected).
    54. They ask you to hasten on the torment and they do not realize that Hell encompasses the disbelievers.
    55. The Day will come when the torment enveloping them hangs over their heads and is under their feet. There and then (the angel entrusted with tormenting them will say to them), “Taste the fatal consequence of your evil deeds.”
    56. O you My bondmen who believed in Me and My Messenger, My earth is vast, indeed (for those who want to flee the land of disbelief); therefore worship Me (and Me alone).
    57. Every self will experience death, and all of you will be brought back to Us (to requite you for your deeds, be they good or bad).
    58. Then those who believed in Allah (His Books, and His messengers) and did righteous deeds. We will accommodate them in the Garden in eternity in mansions beneath which rivers flow, and this is the reward of those who worked for it. 
    59. They endure patiently and put their trust in their Lord. 
    60. So many among Allah’s created beings who live on earth which cannot (due to weakness) provide themselves with livelihood. Allah provides them with what is necessary for their sustenance as He does provision you (people) with victuals, food and drink, and He is All-Hearer and All-Knowing.
    61. And if you ask them, Muhammad, who has created the heavens and the earth and reduced the sun and the moon to a state of subservience, they will say “Allah” (and “Only Allah).” And so how could they be diverted from acknowledging the Oneness of Allah!
    62. Allah outspreads livelihood generously on whom He wills of His bondmen, and He also gives with restraint and by measure to whom He wills. He is, indeed, All-Knowing of all things.
    63. And if you ask them who sends water from the heaven and revives the earth after it has suffered death, they will say “Allah.” Then say to them “Thank Allah” (for admitting the truth). Most of them do not comprehend (the facts).
    64. Life here is but a diversion, and an amusement; whereas the Home in the Hereafter is the life that is meaningful, significant, and eternal, if they know the truth.
    65. They associate other deities with Allah, but when on board ship (and the wind is rising and the sea roughening), they invoke Allah faithfully and Him exclusively to save them. And when He (extends mercy to them and) delivers them to safety, they simply associate other deities with Him. 
    66. They do that in order to deny all that Allah has given them and let them enjoy themselves. (It will not be for long;) then they will come to know (the sad truth.)
    67. Do they not see the favor that Allah has conferred upon them and that He established a secure Sanctuary in their midst (in Makkah), where people feel safe and secure, where all around them people are snatched. Do they not see all these favors and believe in untruth, and disbelieve in the favor of Allah?
    68. And who is more unjust than he who fabricates lies against Allah or dismisses the truth when it comes right to him! But is there not in Hell a lodging for the disbelievers (in Allah)?
    69. But those who strove in Our cause (and endured hardships in order to uphold Our religion), We will guide to the righteous ways. And Allah upholds those who are fair-doers.

