SURAH 30
AR-RUM
The Romans
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah begins with mentioning the Romans’ defeat and Allah’s promise to the believers to grant them victory over the Persians. It calls upon them to reflect on Allah’s creation and to journey through the land to know the end of the disbelievers who inhabited the land for a longer time than did the Quraysh. It refers to the conditions of the people on the Day of Resurrection, mentions the believers’ reverence of Allah and worshiping Him in the morning, evening, midday, and in the afternoon. It draws attention to the evidence that proves Allah’s oneness as exhibited by the succession of day and night, variation in tongues, and the universal phenomena in the heavens and on the earth. It gives examples to prove the falsehood of associating other deities with Allah, reminding the mankind that Allah created them and conferred His grace upon them, strengthened the ties of the family and the bond of society, and gave special attention to law, so prohibiting riba (interest), ordaining  zakah (obligatory poor-due), and urging the people to be dutiful to their relatives.
    Then Allah reminds the people of His favor on them, calls them to stick to their religion and obey Him, draws their attention to the wonders of the creation that prove His omnipotence and authority, and shows the phases through which man grows till he reaches feeble age.
    The last verses refer to the Day of Resurrection, which the disbelievers deny. Then the surah ends with advising the Prophet to firmly adhere to the truth and to be patient in hardships, as Allah’s promise will certainly come true.
 
    1. A. (alif), L. (lam), M. (mim). The surah starts with this verse to draw attention to the fact that the Qur’an is composed of the very letters that the Arabs easily and intelligibly utter. Yet, the deniers utterly failed to emulate it. It also draws people’s attention to listen and contemplate, and urges them to believe in Muhammad’s message.
    2. The Romans (Christians) have been overcome (by the pagan Persians).
    3. In the land near by (the near end of the Roman Empire, Syria). But the tide of battle will turn and, following their defeat, victory will come.
    4. Before (nine) years elapsed (while the polytheists rejoiced for the Persians’ victory and said to the Muslims, “We will defeat you as the Persians (polytheists) defeated the Romans (People of the Book)”— Allah’s promise came true and the Romans won victory over the Persians within the time set by the Qur’an. This was an evident sign of Muhammad’s truthfulness and of the authenticity of his message). To Allah alone is the Command, the ultimate authority in the beginning and the end, past, present, and future. There and then the Muslims will exult beyond a common joy.
    5. For the victory of the Romans. Allah gives victory and triumph to whom He wills and He is All-Mighty and Ever-Merciful.
    6. Such is the promise of Allah, Who never fails His promise, but most people do not know.
    7. They only know the outward means and methods of entertaining things in life (and enjoying its worthless matters). They are heedless of the Hereafter.
    8. Do they not meditate about themselves (to know their fate)? Allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them but in truth for a predetermined point of time, not withstanding that many among mankind disbelieve in the meeting with their Lord.
    9. Have they ([the Makkans] confined themselves in their homeland and) not journeyed through the land and looked to see what was the end of those who denied Allah before them, who were far mightier! They broke up the earth and turned over the soil and populated the land far more than these people have done. Their messengers presented them with convincing divine signs and revelations (but they denied everything). Therefore Allah has taken them by their sins. It was not Allah who was unjust to them before warning and respiting them, but it was they who were unjust to themselves.
    10. Then there came the evil end of those who did odious deeds. They cried lies to Allah’s evident signs (and His divine revelations), and they mocked them.
    11. Allah begins creation and reproduces it. (He creates and recreates,) and to Him you will be sent back.
    12. And when the Day of the Final Hour has come, the criminals will be dumb founded.
    13. And none of their predominant associates can present himself to intercede on their behalf, and they will disbelievers in their associates.
    14. So that when the Day of the Final Hour comes to pass, all will be separated from each other.
    15. Then those who believed and did righteousness will rejoice beyond common joy in the bliss and the beatitude of Heaven’s Garden.
    16. But as for those who disbelieved and cried lies to Our Signs and the Meeting of the Hereafter, they will be eternally overtaken by the torment.
    17. Therefore, praise Allah and extol His glorious attributes at the close of the day and when you rise in the morning.
    18. And to Him alone is addressed the grateful praise (and acknowledgement of benefits and favors) in the heavens and on earth, and when darkness prevails and when the day has climbed its peak of highest noon.
    19. He causes the living to issue forth from the dead, and He causes the dead to issue from the living, and He revives the earth after it has suffered death; similarly He will resurrect you.
    20. And among His visible signs (and His marvels displaying omnipotence and authority) is that He created you from dust (by special creation), and you developed as mortals spreading (throughout the earth in various directions). 
    21. And among His Signs is that by a special creation He created from yourselves spouses as your counterparts in whom you seek consolation and find comfort, and between you both He implanted affection and mercy. These are signs, indeed, (of Allah’s omnipotence and authority) that are observed by people who meditate.
    22. And among the signs (of His omnipotence and wisdom) is the creation of the heavens and the earth. And the variation in your tongues and in your color (black and white and other colors), marvels apprehended by those who know.
    23. And among the signs of His omnipotence is your sleeping in night and day and made obtaining provision of His Grace, signs so significant as to impress those who can hear.
    24. And among His signs is that He exhibits to view lightning that moves you with the feeling of fear from storm and with the feeling of hope of rainfalls to revive the land that has suffered with drought. All precepts concerning Allah’s omnipotence and authority are comprehended in these signs by those who consider.
    25. And among the signs of His omnipotence and wisdom and vast mercy is the stability of the heavens and the earth at Allah’s command. When He summons you to appear out of the earth before Him for judgment, you come out in response to His command.
    26. And to Allah belongs all beings in the heavens and on earth, each and all being obedient and devout to His will.
    27. And it is He who begins creation and reproduces it after death, and this process of re-creation is, indeed, quite easy for Him to do. There is nothing comparable to Him  in the heavens and on earth, and He is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    28. Allah has given you a similitude from yourselves (given to those who associate other deities with Allah). Do you have associates among those you have on hand (be they captives or those reduced to a servile state) who go shares with you in the affluence We have bestowed on you, and stand with you on equal terms, and you fear them as you fear yourselves for injustice and temptation for ill-gotten gain? (If you neither  comprehend that nor accept it, then how could you attribute to Allah partners of His created beings?) Thus We expound Our signs distinctly expressing all that they meant for the people who consider.
    29. In effect those who have (unjustly denied Allah) followed their own prejudices without knowledge. Neither can anyone guide those whom Allah has justly led into error, nor can anyone offer them vindication.
    30. And so set your face upright, Muhammad, and direct your heart and thoughts upon the Religion conduct. And adhere to the natural disposition Allah has implanted in mankind. That is, they are prone to the oneness of Allah and do not deny it; no exchange ever will there be nor should there be. This right and commendable religion is the upright Religion, but most of mankind do not know.
    31. Turn penitently to Allah, do piously whatever He commands you to do, abandon whatever He forbids you, and keep up prayers and never be among those who associate with Him other deities.
    32. Who caused disunity in their same religion ([polytheism] into various sects), each party exulting in what they have.
    33. And when mankind are touched or befallen with a misfortune or met with an adversity, they invoke Allah their Lord penitently, turning to Him exclusively (and asking Him to deliver them). And when He makes them taste His mercy (and delivers them from what was burdensome), some of them associate other deities with Him. 
    34. Therefore, they will end up disbelieving in all that We have given them. You may enjoy yourselves, then, you will come to know (the sad truth).
    35. Or did We send down an authority on them speaking of their course of action? We send to them a witness attesting to their associating other deities with Allah!
    36. And if We make mankind taste Our mercy, they rejoice beyond a common joy; and if they happen to meet with a misfortune as an affliction for what their wrongful and unclean hands have committed, they despond.
    37. Do they (the disbelievers) not see that Allah outspreads livelihood generously and confers support gratuitously on whom He wills, and He also gives with restraint and by measure to whom He wills? These are signs for people who believe.
    38. Therefore, give your kindred what is benevolently due and the indigent and to the wayfarer. This is better and advantageous, indeed, for those who are willing to seek the Face of Allah, and those are the prosperers.
    39. And whatever money you invest expecting interest or profit by way of riba [interest] (to appropriate people’s property wrongfully to yourselves), is an ill-gotten gain that will never yield an increment with Allah, nor will it ever grow with Him (as benevolence excessively does). Whereas Allah will increase immeasurably what you invest in zakah, willing to seek the Face of Allah (or benevolence as an obligation to Allah), and such persons are those to whom what is saved with Allah will be increased manifold.
    40. Allah is He Who created you and provisioned you with livelihood. He then causes you to die, and (at a predetermined point of time) He will give you life again. Is there any among your predominant (partners whom you worship besides Allah) who is able to do that? Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely beyond those they associate with Him.
    41. Burning, barrenness of the land, plagues, recession, and drowning have spread as a result of the corruption and sin that peoples’ hands have earned. Allah will make them taste the consequence of some of their deeds in this life so that they might turn to Him (in repentance).
    42. Say to them, Prophet, “Travel through the land and see what was the end of those who came to this world before (you). (Allah annihilated them and destroyed their dwellings,) as most of them were polytheists—as you are—who associated other deities with Allah.”
    43. And set your face, Muhammad, upon Allah’s upright Religion—before the inevitable Day that no one can avert nor will it be revoked by Allah. This will be the Day when they will be sundered apart (and divided into assemblages of like persons).
    44. And he who disbelieves (in Allah’s system of faith and worship) will find that the consequence of his disbelief rebounds back on him. And they are who do righteousness, then for themselves they have gained access to an abode in the beatitude of Heaven (Allah willing).
    45. For He recompenses those whose hearts have believed and done righteousness, and He doubles their rewards with His grace, in contrast to the disbelievers (who denied His favor), whom He does not love.
    46. And among the signs of His omnipotence and mercy is that He sends forth the winds as a glad tiding heralding a joyful event (rain and the propulsion by its action upon the sails) and grants you the taste of His mercy. And the ships move on the surface of the water by His Command for you to seek His Grace to the end that you may thank Him.
    47. And before you, Muhammad, We sent messengers conveying Our divine message to their people. They presented them with clear and plain evidences (that attested the truthfulness of their messages, but they did not believe them). And by consequence, We avenged our right by inflicting punishment upon those who were criminals. At the same time it was incumbent on Us to give victory to the believers.
    48. It is Allah Who sends the winds to stir up clouds that He spreads in the heaven here and there as He wills. Then He makes a cumulus or rounded masses heaped upon each other where you see the raindrops issuing from within. And when He makes it light upon whom He wills of His bondmen, they rejoice.		
    49. Albeit before it was sent down on them they had lost hope and dumbfounded.
    50. Therefore, look into the effect of the rain when extended to the people (how He revives the land with plants after it had suffered death)! And He Who will bring the dead back to life, for He is Ever-Determiner over everything.
    51. And should We send a wind (drying up moisture and depriving plants and fruits of their natural color), making them turn yellow, they would (feel ungrateful) and turn disbelievers.
    52. And so, you will not be able, Muhammad, to make your voice reach the dead, nor will you be able to make the deaf to hear the call, when they turn away withdrawing.
    53. And you cannot guide the blind out of error. You will be audible only to those who believe in Our signs, so they are Muslims.
    54. Allah is He Who created you of utter weakness, then from weakness to strength He evolved you,  then He reversed the stage of strength to a stage of weakness and gray hair. He creates what He wills, and He is All-Knowing of all matters of His creation, Ever-Determiner.
    55. And the Day when the Final Hour has come up, the criminals will swear they only reposed (in this life or in their tombs) for an hour. And just as they will make the wrong estimate of time, so they were diverged into falsehood.
    56. But those prophets, angels, and believers to whose minds Allah granted divine knowledge will say, “But you lingered in the Book of Allah till the Day of Resurrection, which you denied, and this is it, the promised Day of Resurrection, but you did not know.”
    57. (There and then the people will be resurrected.) No excuse will be accepted from the unjust disbelievers (for denying and disbelieving their messengers), nor will they be allowed to make amends.
    58. We have set forth in this Qur’an for mankind all kinds of examples. Yet if you should present them with any signs, the disbelievers are sure to say, “You are only wrong-doers.”
    59. Thus Allah stamps on the hearts of those who do not know.
    60. Therefore, be patient, Muhammad (and be unwearied in the face of difficulties and hindrances). The promise of Allah (to grant you victory over your enemies and make Islam triumphant over all religions is the truth). Let not those who have no certitude in Allah and His Messenger induce you to levity.


