SURAH 31
LUQMAN
Luqman
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah begins by introducing a discourse on the Book (the Qur’an) and what it contains of guidance and mercy. It describes those whose deeds are imprinted with wisdom and piety, and the fruits of victory they will reap here and in the hereafter. The surah refers to the disbelievers and their arrogance, their inordinate self-esteem, and the just retributive punishment they must expect. It gives an account of some of the cosmic marvels proving Allah’s omnipotence, and absoluteness. It is Allah’s creation that raises the question: What have those whom the disbelievers invoke besides Allah created? The surah quotes Luqman’s exhortation of his son to what is good and laudable and commends man to be kind to his parents. It shows what Allah has made subservient to man, and the seen and unseen favors He has conferred upon him.
    It mentions those who argue against Allah without sound knowledge and who follow their parents’ faith as a pretext for not believing in Allah’s message. It also gives attribution to those who submit to Allah’s will while doing good deeds. It advises the Prophet not to be saddened by disbelief, as the disbelievers’ end will only be decided by Allah. Then the surah gives many details of the exponents of Allah’s omnipotence, glory, and mercy.
    It also mentions that when the disbelievers are asked about those exponents, they acknowledge that Allah has created them and that they benefit from Allah’s grace; and they seek His help when in hardship and promise to obey Him, but they fail to fulfill their promises.
    The surah commands man to be pious to Allah, to fear requital and remuneration, and warns him of self-conceit and obeying Satan. It ends by mentioning events, some of which come under the Unknown, that is they are known only to Allah. 
    The most important points that the surah deals with are three: (1) glad tidings to the believers of their blessed rewards and warning the disbelievers of their punishment; (2) cosmic marvels that attest to Allah’s omnipotence, oneness, glory, and mercy; (3) great commandments that care for purity of faith, sticking to obeying Allah, and the best of manners.
 
    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated, and to draw the people’s attention to listen and reflect upon it. (The disbelievers have already agreed to make noises when it is recited and not listen to it.) 
    2. These are divine signs presented in the Book (the Qur’an), the fountainhead of wisdom.
    3. These verses are a complete guide and comprehensive mercy to the fair-doers.
    4. Who fully keep up the prayer, give zakah (poor-dues), and are of the certainty of the hereafter.
    5. Such persons are on the path of righteousness, and Providence is their guide, and these are the prosperers (who will reap the fruits of victory here and in the hereafter).
    6. And among mankind is he who indulges in vain talk and keeps telling it to the people to lead them into error from the way of Allah in ignorance and want of divine knowledge. He makes Allah’s message the object of mockery. Such persons will suffer the humiliating torment (laid upon the damned).
    7. And when Our signs are recited to such a pervert, he simply withdraws and turns away in inordinate pride, as if he heard nothing divine, as though there is obstruction in his ears. Tell him, Muhammad, and the like of him to expect a painful torment.
    8. But those who have believed and perfected their deeds with wisdom and righteousness will be rewarded with the blissful gardens.
    9. Where they will pass to eternity (as promised by Allah), Whose promise is the truth. He is The All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    10. He it is Who created the heavens without pillars you can see, and raised them with their spheres. He furnished the earth with firm stays, (mountains) placed in a certain setting, to stabilize it lest it should sway you from side to side or in all directions. And He scattered over it beasts of all sorts. And We send from heaven rainwater instrumental in vegetal growth in honorable pairs.
    11. This is what Allah has created. And now show me, (you disbelievers), what have those you revered part from Him created? The fact is that the unjust wrongdoers are lost in evident error.
    12. We brought to Luqman wisdom (knowledge, and the capacity of judging rightly in matters relating to life and conduct). And We exhorted him to thank Allah. And whoever gives thanks, he gives thanks for himself. And he who disbelieves, then Allah is Ever-Affluent, Ever Praiseworthy.
    13. In admonishing his son, Luqman said, “O my son, never associate with Allah (other deities), for associating others is monstrous injustice.”
    Luqman’s exhortation to his son is interrupted here to introduce certain duties owed to Allah and to the parents so that the son may be more willing to open his heart’s ears.
    14. We enjoined on man to be kind to his parents (and to display to them a gentle and a kind disposition). With feebleness upon feebleness his mother bears him and she spends two years (in suckling him) before he is weaned. And We exhorted him thus: “Impel yourself, man, to the feeling of gratitude and gratefulness to Me and to your parents, for in the end to Me will be the Destiny.
    15. “And should they strive to force you to associate with Me other deities of whom you have no knowledge, then do not obey them (in this respect). But keep them company in this world with beneficence. And follow the way of those who turn to Allah in penitence and in Him they trust, and in the end, to Me you will all return when I will inform you of all that you did.”
    Luqman continues:
    16. “My son,” he said, “you must realize that everything—(material or immaterial) as light or as little as a mustard seed be it inside a rock or in the heavens or on earth—Allah will bring it forth. Allah is Most-Gracious, Ever-Cognizant.”
    17. “My son,” he added, “keep up prayer and enjoin equity, forbid what is wrong, odious, and abominable; and be patient with composure when exposed to an affliction, for this reflects resolve concerning His Commands.
    18. “And do not turn your face away from mankind nor inflate it with pride and vanity, nor should you walk on earth displaying merry self-esteem (or with an overweening opinion of your qualities, attainments, or estate). And realize that Allah does not love every boastful one who exalts himself and displays conceit.
    19. “And walk with moderate steps and with regular pace (conformable to a standard recognized as formally correct). And tone down your voice when you give utterance or expression to an emotion, opinion, feeling, thought, or discussion for the most repulsive, objectionable, and displeasing of voices is the voice of asses.”
    20. Do you people not see that Allah has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and He made all favors abound in you, the seen or unseen? Yet among mankind are those who dispute about Allah for want of knowledge, want of guidance, and for want of a Book imparting divine knowledge, wisdom, and light.
    21. And when exhorted to (tread the path of Allah) and to recognize what He has sent down, they (defiantly) say, “We only follow the particular system of faith and worship our fathers were bent on.” A great pity, even if Satan is calling them to the torment of the Blaze.
    22. And he, who surrenders his face to Allah and he is a fair-doer, will have grasped firmly at the eternal, the unchangeable, and the most secure handhold (Grip). And to Allah, the Ultimate Authority, are committed and submitted all matters and all affairs for consideration, decision, and execution here and in the Hereafter.
    23. And he disbelieves in Allah; do not let his disbelief affect you with grief. To Us they will return when We inform them of all that they had done (and left undone). Allah is, indeed, All-Knowing of private thoughts and feelings that are in the breasts.
    24. We will satisfy their needs and make them hold and enjoy the same for a little while (up to a predetermined point of time); then We will compel them to a massive torment.
    25. And if you should ask them, Muhammad, who has created the heavens and the earth, they will say, “Allah.” Then say to them, “Praise be to Allah to Whom praises precede and thanks succeed.” Never doubt but most of them have no knowledge.
    26. To Allah belong all that is in heaven and all that is on earth (so, how can they abandon worshiping Him)?  And He is The Ever-Affluent, The Ever-Praiseworthy.
    27. If the wood of all the trees growing on earth were to be manufactured into pens, and the vast body of sea water on the surface of the earth and seven seas as much were serving the purpose of committing Allah’s words to writing, never would Allah’s words be depleted; but the water would be exhausted before Allah’s words have depleted. Allah is indeed All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    28. (You must realize that) your creation and the process of recreating you or bringing you back to life at resurrection entails no more than the creation of one single self! Allah is All-Hearing and All-Seeing.
    29. Do you not see that Allah inserts the night into the day, and He inserts the day into the night, and that He makes the sun and the moon in subservience to a unique system, each running to a stated term (till the Day of Resurrection), and that He is All-Cognizant of all that you do (and will requite you accordingly)?	
    30. All that is mentioned of the marvels of Allah’s creation and omnipotence is to establish the absolute fact that they are created by Allah, The Absolute Truth and The Worthy of worship. And all that you invoke apart from Him is the untruth and that Allah is Ever-Exalted, Ever-Great.
    31. Do you, man, not see that the ships run in (seas) by His mercy and favor carrying your provision, to show you some of His signs of His omnipotence? In these divine signs to those who are patient and thankful.
    32. And when those who disbelieve in Allah are overwhelmed at sea with waves overshadowing in billows (and think that they will certainly drown), they invoke Allah for mercy and they invoke Him faithfully to His religion to save them. And when He saves them and delivers them to safety on land, then only some of them do keep their promise and begin to adopt an honest and godly course of life. And no one denies Allah’s grace and signs but the one who is perfidious and ungrateful.
    33. O mankind, be pious to (Allah), your Lord. And fear a day when no father can recompense his son nor be of advantage to him or be able to offer him help, nor can a son recompense his father or be of profit to him. And (do realize) that Allah’s promise is truth. Therefore, do not let the present life delude you, nor should the whispers of  the Deluder (Satan) ever delude you from Allah.
    34. Allah keeps in His Providence the knowledge of the predetermined moment of the Final Hour. (No one else can know it). He causes the condensed succoring water vapor in the atmosphere to fall down in raindrops from the heaven as He wills. He knows what is in the wombs (whether be it male or female, healthy or defective). No self, be it good or bad, knows what it will earn—material or immaterial—tomorrow, and no self knows in which land it is destined to come upon the encounter with death. Allah is, indeed, All-Knowing and All-Cognizant.
