SURAH 32
AS-SAJDAH
the Prostration
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed after Surat Al-Mu’minun. It begins with emphasizing that the Qur’an is a divine revelation sent by Allah. It then narrates the task of the Prophet Muhammad, the creation of the heavens and the earth, the marvels of a cosmic nature, and the perfection of everything Allah created, and some of the steps or stages in the creation of man. The arguments of those who deny resurrection are presented and refuted. Then it describes the status of the disbelievers on the Day of Resurrection, the status of the believers when they are reminded of Allah’s signs and revelations, the requital for both the believers and disbelievers, the revelation of the Tawrah to Musa (Moses), and how Allah dealt with the Children of Isra’il. Then it draws the attention of the Makkan disbelievers to reflect on the annihilation of those who were before them, to believe in resurrection, and it refutes their mockery of the Day of Victory. 
  
    1. A (alif). L (lam). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. This Book (the Qur’an) has without doubt been sent down from Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. 
    3. But they (the disbelievers) say, “He (Muhammad) has fabricated it (and related it to Allah)!” They should never have said that, for it is, indeed, the truth revealed by Allah (your Lord) to you, Muhammad, to warn a people who never received a messenger before you, serving as a demonstration and a warning that they might be guided to all truth.
    4. Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between in six days. He then leveled Himself on the throne (of dominion, grace, and mercy). Besides Him you have no patron, nor an intercessor. Can you people consider (Allah’s admonition)? 	
    5. He conducts the Command (all affairs and all matters of His created beings) from the heavens above down to the earth below. And the process bounds back to Him over a period of a day amounting to one thousand years of those you (people) count (according to your earthly calendar). 	
    6. And so this is Allah, your Creator, The All-Knowing of the unseen and the witnessed. And He is The All-Mighty and The Merciful,
    7. Who has made fair everything He created (and brought into being according to His wisdom), and He began the creation of man from clay.
    8. And He made his progeny emerge from an extraction of a contemptible water.
    9. Then He molded him and breathed into him of His Spirit. And He made for you people (divine abilities:) the ability of hearing and that of sight and insight (in order that you hear, see, and reflect); yet how little do you thank (Him)!
    10. And they (the disbelievers who deny the resurrection) say, “Do you mean that after we are lost in the dust (and absorbed by the earth) we will be resurrected anew (and brought back to life)!” But they disbelieve in the Meeting with their Lord.
    11. Say to them, Muhammad, “(When time is due), then the angel of death, who has been entrusted with you, will take you up, you will be sent back to Allah your Lord.”
    12. And if only you, Muhammad, could see the criminals when they are standing before Allah on the Day of Judgment; protruding their heads in the Providence of their Lord and saying, “Now, Allah, our Lord, we can see and hear. Would You send us back to do righteousness. Surely we have certitude.”
    13. If We had decided we would have given every self its guidance, but the Word from Me has come true, “I shall fill Hell with jinn and mankind all together.”
    14. Now you taste the fatal consequence of forgetting the Meeting with this Day, and in return We have also forgotten you. Now you taste the eternal torment that is laid upon (the damned for committing yourselves to actions contrary to what was dictated to you by Allah’s revelations).
    
    
    15. Those who faithfully believe in Our signs, their hearts are only those who fall prostrate to Allah, when they are reminded of them, and extol His glorious attributes, and they do not wax proud*.
    16. Their sides shun the beds for nocturnal devotion, and they make invocation unto their Lord, fearing His wrath and hoping for His mercy, and they spend in benevolence of Our grace that We provided them.
    17. No self knows what Allah has in store for it of great favor that will be viewed with pleasure and with eyes comforted as a recompense of what they did (and attained, fulfilled and completed, perfected and accomplished).
    18. Can he who is believer like him who is immoral? (Would people be equal in requital while they differed in deeds?) 
    19. But those, who believed and done righteous deeds, will have their quarters in the Gardens of bliss in which they will abide in requital of all the good they had accomplished in life.
    20. Those who are immoral will be put to dwell in the Fire. As often as they try to go out of it, they will be brought back and reinstated there and will be told, “Now you taste the torment of the Fire that you have always cried lies to.”
    21. And We will make them taste of the near torment, lesser than the great torment, that they might repent and return to Allah.
-------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    
    22. And who is more unjust (to himself and the truth) than he who is reminded of Allah’s evident signs and revelations, and he veers away and persistently avoids them (and abstains from listening to them)! We will take just vengeance on the criminals.
    23. We brought Musa (Moses) the Book (Tawrah); therefore do not let any course of action give you an occasion to uncertainty and suspicion about meeting him. We made it a guidance to the Children of Isra’il (to all truth).
    24. We made some of the (religious) leaders and authorities of the Children of Isra’il on matters of the law to guide the people; and We authorized this course after they had exercised patience and forbearance and had certitude in Our signs.
    25. Therefore, on the Day of Ressurection, Allah your Lord, will decide the question pertaining to every messenger and his own people about the matters on which they differed.
    26. Has Allah let free those who denied their messengers, and is it not a guidance to them how many generations before them We made to perish as they walk in their dwellings (and pass by their homes)? Indeed, in these are signs; do they not hear?
    27. Do they not see that We drive the rainwater from other sources to the arid land and there We stir it to activity, causing the growth of all sorts of vegetation serving as food for their cattle and for themselves? Can they not apprehend with their sight?
    28. And they (the disbelievers) say to you, Muhammad, and to the believers, “When will Allah grant you conquest? (Tell us the date) if you are sincerely declaring the truth!”
    29. Say to them, Muhammad, “On the day of conquest of those who conformed to Islam, the disbelievers will not profit by pleading belief in Allah then, nor will their punishment be put in respite.” 
    30. Therefore, veer away from them, Muhammad, and wait for the timely promise of Allah to you that they will also be waiting. 


