 SURAH 33
AL-AHZAB
The Confederates
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah begins by calling upon the Prophet to entertain the piety due to Allah and put his trust in Him. Then it talks about the adopted sons and emphasizes that they should not be acknowledged as sons of their foster parents. It also mentions the love and obedience ordained by Allah to His Prophet, and respect and appreciation ordained to the Mothers of the Believers, the Prophet’s wives. It mentions the covenant Allah has made with His messengers to communicate His messages, gives the details of the fear and confusion of the Battle of Al-Ahzab (the Confederates), and the victory of the believers that exemplified the fulfillment of Allah’s promise. It gives special attention to the manners that the Prophet’s wives should demonstrate. Then it again talks about adopted sons and nullifies the pre-Islamic precept that men are not allowed to marry the divorced women who were once the wives of their adopted sons. It then shows how exemplary the Prophet Muhammad has been that his conduct induces imitation. The surah then recommends that women who are divorced before consummating marriage should be given necessary provision and set free gracefully. It was only allowed to the Prophet to marry the women who dedicated themselves to him, but he was forbidden to unite in wedlock with other women than these. The Muslims are taught the manners they should use when they enter the Prophet’s house for a meal and when they leave, and taught that if they wish to ask the Prophet’s wives for anything, they must ask them from behind a screen. The Prophet’s wives are asked to dress in flowing outer garments that cover them over. The surah also speaks about the Hour (of resurrection) and the great agitation and anxiety of the Last Day and exhorts the people to be pious and avoid vain discourse. The surah ends with a reference to Allah’s ordinance, which man accepted; whereas it was declined when offered to the heavens, the earth, and the mountains.
    The most important objectives of the surah are these: to nullify the precept that men are not allowed to marry the divorced women who were once the wives of their adopted sons; to show Allah’s favor on the believers by fulfilling His promise to grant them victory over the disbelievers; to give details of the manners that Allah has ordained the believers to follow when they enter the Prophet’s house; to forbid them to marry his wives after his decease; and to ordain some manners for the Prophet’s wives.
 
    1. O Prophet, keep entertaining the profound piety due to Allah and never obey the disbelievers or the hypocrites. Allah is indeed All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    2. And follow what is being revealed to you from Allah your Lord, for Allah Who reveals to you is indeed All-Cognizant of all that you (the disbelievers and hypocrites) do.
    3. And put all your trust in Allah, and He is enough to be your Trustee Who exercises protecting vigilance over you.
    4. Never did Allah provide a man with two hearts within the hollow of his body nor did He make your wives whom you declare to be your “mother’s back” your mothers, nor did He ordain that your adopted sons be designated as your sons. This is your story and what you say with your mouths (but it entails no obligation whatsoever). But Allah declares the truth to guide you (and He alone guides the people to the way of righteousness).
    5. Call the (adopted) sons by their real fathers. This is more equitable with Allah, and if you do not know their fathers (nor can you trace them), then they are brothers in the religion and your patronized ones. You incurred no fault when you erroneously attributed them to their foster (adopted) fathers in the past, but not so when your hearts deliberately intend. But Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful.
    6. The Prophet Muhammad is worthier of patronizing the believers and more merciful to them than they are to themselves (so, they should love and obey him), and his wives are their mothers. Those of you who are related by blood or by descent from a common ancestor take precedence in patronizing each other, i.e. in inheriting from each other over those who embraced Islam and over those who emigrated, as is decreed in the Book of Allah, the Qur’an. Unless it be beneficence to your patrons you are doing to who are unrelated to you by blood (so, you can give them as a sign of sympathy or bequeath to them a part of your wealth). This system of inheritance is an edict that has been inscribed in the Qur’an, the Book. 
    7. And remember when We entered into a Compact with each of the prophets of the past (to fulfill the duty entrusted to them by Allah to call to His path), just as We entered into a covenant with you and with Nuh (Noah), Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa (Moses) and `Isa (Jesus) the son of Maryam (Mary); and We bound them to a solemn Compact.
    8. So that He questions the prophets and the sincere people on the Day of Judgment about the message they communicated to their peoples. Meantime He has prepared for the disbelievers a painful torment.
    9. O you who believe, remember with gratitude and gratefulness the favor of Allah which was made to abound in you. When you were confronted with and surrounded by the thickest hosts of your enemies and We sent against them a fierce, cold wind as well as invisible angels who filled their hearts with horror. Allah is always All-Seeing (All-Knowing) of your deeds and truthfulness of your intentions, the One Who defends you.
    10. They (the enemy forces) came to you from the east and west and from high and low ground.* Therefore your eyes swerved and grew dim and beclouded and the hearts throbbed and leaped into the larynxes and you began to surmise vain surmises about Allah.
    *This verse does not mean that the enemies came from everywhere, for if we review the details of this battle we will see that those who came from the high ground are Ghatfan and its fellow tribes from Najd, whereas those who came from the low ground are Quraish, who came from western Arabia. But the angels came from above to help the Prophet and the believers.
    11. There, the believers were tried and quaked with a severe quake.
    12. And remember when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a sickness said, “Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but deception and delusion.”
    13. And remember when a section of the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease (advised the people of the city Yathrib to defect). They said to them, “O people of Yathrib, this is not the place for you; just return to your homes.” Another party asked the Prophet’s permission (if they could be excused to go back to Madinah). They said to him, “Our homes are exposed and defenseless,” when in fact they were not defenseless, but in truth they wanted to flee by this false excuse.
    14. And if the forces had laid siege to the city and moved into it from all sides, they (the hypocrites) would have been incited to sedition and would have committed it and fought on their (the enemy’s side) against the Muslims, and they would have lingered in it but little.
    15. Yet those who fled from the battlefield had already made a covenant with Allah never to turn their backs or flee the enemy. They failed to realize that a covenant with Allah is, indeed, an immense responsibility that must be fulfilled, and answered for.
    16. Say to them, Muhammad, “Neither defection nor flight will avail you if you should flee the enemy to escape death or killing, otherwise, your life is not short and its enjoyment is short-lived.”
    17. Say to them, “Who can safeguard you against Allah (or protect you from Him) should He decide to let a misfortune befall you? Or who can obstruct His mercy if He decides to extend it to you?” Such people will not find a patron besides Allah nor a vindicator to offer them help. 
    18. Indeed, Allah knows the hinderers among you, and He knows those who exhort their associates and fellows-in-arms against fighting, saying to them, “Join us (and desert these fighting men).” And they themselves hardly join the Muslim forces in combat.
    19. (They seem so caring for you in peaceful times,) but when fear and dread overwhelm you, they look at you, their eyes roll and turn round in their sockets like someone about to swoon (or on whom death is casting its shadow). Yet no sooner is fear gone, they flay you with sharp tongues, being too avaricious. Such persons did not really conform to Allah’s system of faith and worship. Consequently, Allah frustrated their deeds to worthlessness, and nothing is easier for Allah to do.
    20. They (the hypocrites) think that the confederates have not yet lifted the siege nor have they gone away. And should the confederates come again (to Madinah), they will wish they were wandering among the Bedouins in the desert, and then they will learn of your news and events (while at a safe distance). Had these people (been steadfast) among you in combat, they would not have engaged in fighting except only a little.
    21. You have always had a fair example of the Messenger of Allah for the one in whose heart hope springs eternal of Allah’s mercy and of the bliss of the Last Day and who remembers Allah often.
    22. When the believers saw the forces of the confederates, they said, “This is the promise made to us by Allah and His Messenger.” (Labor, effort, and endurance will accomplish victory;) and the promise of Allah and His Messenger is true. Such hardships increased in them belief and total submission to His predestination.
    23. Among those believers are those who made a covenant with Allah to stick firmly to the Prophet’s side (in fighting), and they were true to their covenant with Allah. Some of them have fulfilled their promise (and acquired the glorious privilege of a martyr); others can hardly wait to receive this honor and they have never changed any of their commitments.
    24. Allah justly recompenses the sincere for their sincerity, and He justly torments the hypocrites if He wills or relents towards them, for Allah is always All-Forgiving, the One Who accepts repentance, and Ever-Merciful.
    25. And Allah turned back the disbelievers in their rage. They failed to accomplish their intended end, and Allah spared His votaries the fighting (by sending the winds and the angels). Allah is always All-Strong and All-Mighty.
    26. And He brought down those of the People of the Book who backed the confederates from their bastions and hurled horror in their hearts to the end that you (Muslims) were able to kill some (the men), and hold others as capives (women and children).
    27. And He made you inherit their lands, their residences, and their wealth, as well as a land where you never trodden. And Allah is always Ever-Determiner to do everything He wills whenever He wills.
    28. O Prophet, say to your spouses, “If you like life here and in its mundane adornment, then come, I will fit you out with what is necessary for your enjoyment and set you free gracefully.
    29. “But if you are willing to seek Allah and His Messenger and the bliss of the hereafter (and be content with this inconvenient life), then you must know that Allah has prepared for the fair-doers among you a magnificent reward.”
    30. O wives of the Prophet, should any of you comes up with an evident obscenity, the torment will be doubled for her twofold; and that is easy for Allah.
    31. Allah will reward any of you who is devout to Allah and to His Messenger and does righteousness, with twice as much reward, and a gracefully honorable provision will have been made ready for her.
    32. O wives of the Prophet, (you must realize that) you are not like any of the other women (in privileges, dignity, state, and all other aspects). If, indeed, you entertain the piety (due to Allah), then you must not be subdued in your speech so that you guard yourselves from the one in whose heart there is a sickness. So speak beneficent speech (and let it reflect equity and justice).
    33. And stay at home (and do not go out but for accomplishing a duty ordained by Allah). And if you have to go out for a necessity, do not flaunt as the flaunting that was habitually seen in former times of ignorance and paganism. And keep up prayer and give zakah (poor-due), and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah intends by His commands and admonishments to put away abomination from you (the Prophet’s household), and purify you a thorough purification.
    34. And recall to memory what is recited to you in your homes of Allah’s divine revelations and of the (Prophet’s) wise sayings. Allah is always Most Courteous, Ever-Cognizant.
    35. Those men and the women who submit to Allah, and the men and the women whose hearts believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the men and the women who are thoroughly devout to Allah, and the men and the women who are sincere to Allah and obey His laws, and the men and the women who are patient (under provocation and bear with others their limitation), and the men and the women who are submissive (and their prudence gets the better of their pride), and the men and the women who are charitable to the needy, and the men and the women who fast from food (at the specified time) as a religious observance and fast from sin and from abomination, and the men and the women who guard their sexual morality and refrain from unlawful sexual intercourse, and the men and the women who constantly remember Allah (with their tongue and heart)—they are those who will, indeed, win Allah’s forgiveness. He has prepared for them a magnificent reward.
    36. No man or woman who believes is in a position to exercise choice when once Allah and His Messenger have decided on a Command, pronounced a judgment, or decided on a cause. And he who disobeys Allah and His Messenger will have deviated and will have cast himself in evident error.
    37. And remember when you say to Zayd ibn Harithah—to whom Allah has graciously favored and whom He guided to His system of faith and worship, and you favored him and adopted him as your son—“Hold on to your wife, Zaynab bint Jahsh, and entertain the profound piety due to Allah and be patient with her.” And you conceal in yourself what Allah would inevitably display, that he will divorce her and you will marry her, and you are apprehensive of the people when it is only Allah of Whom you should really be apprehensive (no matter how hard it is for you). (However) when Zayd gained his end of dissolving his marriage, We arranged your matrimonial union with her and espoused her to you to nullify this tradition so that the believers would not feel any restriction if they are willing to marry the women who were once married to their adopted sons who have attained their object of divorce (and have accomplished their end). Allah’s command must be performed.
    38. The Prophet has no restriction for what Allah made legal for him, an Enactment of Allah with the prophets earlier. And Allah’s Command has always been determinable (authoritatively decided, and definitely ascertained).
    39. Those who convey to the people Allah’s divine message and they apprehensive of Him, and they are apprehensive of none but Allah, and Allah is enough as an Ever-Reckoner to call people to account here and hereafter.
    40. Muhammad is not the father of anyone of your men, but he is Allah’s Messenger and the Seal of the Prophets. And Allah is always All-Knowing of everything.
    41. O you who believe, be thankful and grateful to Allah and remember Allah as often as you can. 
    42. And praise Him and extol His glorious attributes at the beginning and the close of the day.
    43. It is He Who respond to your prayers and extends to you His mercy and grace, as do His angels so that He brings you out of darkness into light. He is Ever-Merciful to the believers.
    44. The Day they meet Him on the Day of Judgment, they will be greeted with the expression of good will, “Peace,” and Allah will have prepared for them an honorable reward (gracefully blessed provisions that make them feel His grace deep in their hearts).
    45. O Prophet, We have sent you to the people with the divine message of Islam, to be a witness (to their response), a herald of joyful tidings to the believers, and a warning to the disbelievers,
    46. And to call the people to Allah by His permission, and to stand among them as a source of light and enlightenment (to guide those who are dwelling in the maze of darkness).
    47. And be sure to announce joyful tidings to those who have believed to expect the great bounty of Providence (here and in the hereafter).
    48. And do not obey the disbelievers nor the hypocrites, and pay no attention to their harm, and put your trust in Allah Who (wards off their vice far from you), and He is enough to be your Trustee Who protects you.
    49. O you who believe, if you have been married to believing women and you divorce them before you have touched them (have consummated marriage), then you have no claim upon them to fulfill the prescribed set period of waiting (`iddah); and give them some money in benevolence and release them a becoming release.
    50. O Prophet, We have ratified and confirmed by sanction and solemn enactment your wives to whom you have paid the dower, as well as those slaves on hand whom Allah has conceded to you. Also lawful to you are the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, daughters of maternal uncles and aunts who emigrated with you, in addition to any believing woman who bestows herself to you without dower and you wish to be bound to her in wedlock (or to marry her to another Muslim). This is a privilege that is granted to you exclusively and not to the Muslims at large. We know what We have promulgated and legislated for the believers concerning their wives and those on hand so that you do not feel any restriction, and Allah has always been Ever-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    51. You may defer the turn of whom you decide and bring over to your abode whom you will and whom you choose of those whose turn you have deferred with no fault. This will make them happy and their eyes will be content and they will not grieve at heart; they will all be satisfied with what you have accorded them; and Allah knows what is in your hearts and in your minds. Allah is always All-Knowing of what you feel towards His ordinance and Most-Forbearing toward His creatures.
    52. And as of now it is not lawful for you, Muhammad, to unite in wedlock with more women nor is it lawful to change those you have for other wives, even if their fairness makes you admire them except those slaves you have on hand. And Allah is Ever-Watchful upon all things. 
    53. O you who believe, do not enter the Prophet’s homes unless you are permitted to do so for food, in which case you do not sit waiting for the food until it be ready. But if the Messenger invites you, then enter; and when you have dined, then be excused and do not linger to engage in talk, for such behavior has always hurt the Prophet, who is shy to ask you to leave, but Allah is not shy of (declaring) the truth. And if you wish to ask the Prophet’s wives for anything you want, you must ask them from behind a screen. This is purer for your hearts and their hearts (to be virtuous in life and conduct). By no means should you cause hurt to the Messenger of Allah, nor should you ever marry his widows after his death. This is an enormity in Allah’s Reckoning a monstrous (thing).
    54. Whether you display the deeds that annoy Him or conceal them, you must realize that Allah is indeed All-Knowing of all things.
    55. The Prophet’s wives incur no fault for speaking and appearing without veil before their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their women or those who serve them of those they have on hand (for the urgent need for their service). As for you, wives of the Prophet, give Allah the profound piety due to Him for  Allah is ever a Witness to all things.
    56. Allah extends His (Prayer) mercy and blessings to the Prophet, and His angels shower prayers for him. O, you who believe invoke Allah’s prayer, mercy and blessings on him and pray, “Peace be upon him and blessed be he with all divine favors.”
    57. Indeed, those who hurt Allah and His Messenger, (or entice the people to disbelieve in them) have come within the measure of Allah’s wrath and have incurred Allah’s curse here and hereafter, and He has prepared for them a degrading torment.
    58. And those who hurt the believing men and women or offend them for no valid reason will have borne calumny against themselves and will stand manifest of a major sin.
    59. O Prophet, tell your spouses and your daughters and all Muslim women to dress in flowing outer garments that cover them over. This way of dressing makes it most likely to be identified (as purified women) so as not to be hurt. And Allah is always Ever-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    60. Unless the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a sickness, as well as those who circulate calumnies against the Muslims in Madinah, refrain from such actions, We will induce you to war upon them (and give you mastery over them), and they will then find it difficult to live with you as neighbors there but for a short while.
    61. Cursed wherever they may be and seized wherever they be found and massacred in a general massacre. 
    62. This is Allah's Enactment with the hypocrites and those who rebelled against the prophets and messengers who came to this world before you, and you will not find any alternation in His Enactment.
    63. Mankind ask you, Muhammad, about when the predetermined Eventful Hour of Judgment takes place. Say to them, “It is only Allah and Him Alone Who knows when! How do you know? The Final Hour may well be quite soon.”
    64. Allah has cursed the disbelievers and put in readiness for them the tormenting blaze of Hell,
    65. Where they will pass to eternal (suffering), and never will they find a patron or a vindicator.
    66. This is a Day when their faces will be turned about in the Fire and they will say, “Would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger!”
    67. And they will say, “O Allah our Lord, we have obeyed our masters and our great ones, so they made us err away from the Way.
    68. “O Allah our Lord, (we implore You and we beg You to) bring them double the torment and curse them with a great curse!”
    69. O you who believe, do not in any way hurt the Prophet nor act like those who hurt Musa (Moses), but Allah proclaimed his innocence and he has always been held high in Allah’s esteem.
    70. O you who believe, be pious to Allah, and see that your words are befitting (a disclosure of facts, apposite, appropriate, relevant, and to the point).
    71. So that Allah leads you by His guidance to the right doings and actions and forgives you your guilty deeds. And he who obeys Allah and His Messenger will have gained great victory and obtained triumph.
    72. We offered the Trust to the heavens, the earth, and the mountains, but they refused to bear it (and were timorous of the burdensome consequences involved). But man accepted to carry it. He was, indeed, unjust to himself, having no knowledge (of the logical sequence).
    73. By consequence, Allah will torment the hypocrites, men and women, and the men and women who associate other deities with Him, and He will relent towards the believing men and women. And Allah is always Ever-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
