SURAH 34
SABA’
Sheba
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah begins by stressing that Allah alone is worthy of praise and gratitude for the favors that He has conferred on His servants, since all that is in the heavens and on the earth belong to Him alone.  It also gives an account of the disbelievers’ opinion on the Hour, their disbelief in resurrection, and their accusation that the Prophet is a liar and madman. Therefore, Allah refers them to the signs of His omnipotence and warns them that a punishment may be inflicted on them similar to the one inflicted on their likes; that is, He may swallow them by a yawning chasm He creates beneath them or cause a piece of heaven to fall upon them. On the other hand, He reminds them of the favors He conferred on His intimate servants, as He softened the iron for Dawud, and the jinn were assigned to work for him and do as they were told to produce and construct for him what he willed of sanctuaries and places of worship. Dawud and Sulayman solemnly showed gratitude for Allah’s favors; whereas very few people are grateful to Allah. 
    Then the surah mentions the favors Allah conferred on Saba’ for which they never thanked Him. They enjoyed two fertile and productive gardens right and left; their villages were close to one another, among which they traveled safely and securely. But they denied these favors and asked their stations to be made distant and far apart. So, Allah inflicted on them the punishment He set for those who deny His favors. They also followed the whispers of Iblis (Satan), who had no authority over them and who was nothing but a test to distinguish those who believe in the hereafter from those who doubt it. Then the surah describes their deities as powerless, states that everyone is responsible for his deeds, proves that the Prophet was sent to all mankind, and speaks about how the disbelievers see the Last Day as slow to come, whereas it has a fixed time.
    The surah also narrates what the disbelievers said about the Qur’an and the debate between the extravagant and those viewed with contempt. It admonishes people not to show off with their wealth or children, for they only draw nearer to Allah as much as they benefit others. They belong to Allah, and He gives plentifully to whom He wills and gives by measure to whom He wills. Then it depicts different attitudes of the disbelievers. They said that their Messenger wants to make them deviate from the path their fathers had followed; that the Qur’an is nothing but lies, a fraud, and a work of sorcery; that they neither received a Book nor was a messenger sent to them before. Whereas, the fact is that We sent messengers to those whose power, influence, and news they knew about, and when they rejected the call, We inflicted a severe punishment on them. Then the Prophet is instructed to make his mission clear to them, to call and remind them rather than to compel them. And they are instructed to consider their Prophet: he is neither a madman nor a money collector, and his call to the truth is supported by Allah’s divine revelation to grant them safety and security. When the Hour comes and their fear is excited, no escape can they make and they will be seized in the proximity of Hell. There and then they will say, “We have believed,” but how can they attain faith that they denied before? And now there is a barrier between them and their wish of attaining faith, exactly as what befell their likes. They all were suspicious of the truth that they considered it meaningless.
   
    1. Praise be to Allah alone, to Whom belongs all the animate and the inanimate that exists in the heavens and on earth—past, present, and future—and praised are His glorious attributes hereafter, as He is All-Wise and All-Knowing. 
    2. He knows all that enters and penetrates into the earth—such as water, treasures, and parts of the dead, be it animate or inanimate—and all that arises from it and what erupts from within—such as birds, plants, minerals, and water. And He has knowledge of all that comes down from Heaven—such as angels, books revealed to prophets, rain, and thunder—and of all that ascends—angels and deeds. He is Ever-Merciful and Ever-Forgiving. 
    3. The disbelievers say, “Will the Final Hour (of resurrection and judgment) come to us?” Tell them, Muhammad, “But, indeed, it will come; rest assured by Allah my Lord that it will come upon you. He is All-Knowing of the Unseen (the invisible), and nothing shifts away from Him neither in the heavens nor on earth be it the weight or the size of an atom*, or lesser or larger in degree. All is being recorded in an evident Book (a documentary book that furnishes evidence of facts and of events).”
    *The Arabic word here translated “atom” means a very small thing such as a tiny ant or a mote of dust. This verse proves that things smaller than the atom exist, which was proved by modern science in the twentieth century. 
    4. So that He justly recompenses those who believe and do righteousness. Allah will extend to those knowledgeable believers forgiveness (that obliterates their sins), and an honorable provision.
    5. But those who endeavor against Our signs trying to defy them must expect the torment laid upon the chastised.
    6. Those gifted with knowledge see that what has been sent down to you from your Lord is indeed the undoubted truth guiding to all truth and that it guides to the path that leads directly to Him, the All-Mighty, and Owner of all praise. 
    7. And the disbelievers (insolently and mockingly) say to one another, “Shall we tell you of a man who proclaims that after your bodies (have been reduced to fragments and) have disintegrated, you will be brought back to life and be created anew!
    8. “Is he fabricating against Allah lies or is he mad?” It is not like that, but the fact is that those who disbelieve in resurrection and the Hereafter are in torment, being lost in the maze of error.
    9. Are they not willing to perceive what is before them and what is behind them of the heavens and the earth (and realize how powerful We are)? If We decide, We could swallow them with a yawning chasm We create beneath them or cause lumps of heaven to fall upon them. Either incident by itself is a sign for every penitent bondman.
    10. We bestowed on Dawud of Our bounty all grace, (which was exemplified by the wisdom and the Book). “O mountains,” We said, “reiterate his praises, and so will you, O birds!” And We softened iron for him (to make whatever he willed).
    11. We directed him thus: “Make coats of armor (to guard you against your enemies), and use your skill and talent in the construction of the chain-mail and in the overlapping of the plates.” And We said to him and his family, “Do good for yourselves and others. I am All-Beholding of all that you do.”
    12. And to Sulayman We made the wind subservient, covering the distance normally taking one month in one morning stride forward and turning in one evening stride backward. We made a source of (brass) copper constantly flow freely for him. And (some) of the jinn served between his two hands with the permission of his Lord, and he of the jinn who swerved or did not fulfill Our (Allah’s) Command, We subjected him to the torment of the Blaze.
    13. (The jinn were assigned to work for him), to build for him what he decided of sanctuaries and places of worship, and to make for him images and statues and all kinds of pots and vessels of rounded form, broad and deep, serving various purposes, some being large enough to be reservoirs and others as huge fixed copper vessels. And We said, “Do righteousness, O House of Dawud, and let your deeds reflect thanks and gratefulness to Allah.” But it is only a few of My servants who thank and are grateful.
    14. And when We decreed Sulayman’s death, nothing drew the jinn’s attention to his death but a little earthly beast gnawing the base of his rod on which he leaned so that he collapsed. There and then the jinn realized that if they had known the unseen, they would not have lingered in the degrading torment.
    15. There was a great sign of Our omnipotence (that was extended) to the people of Saba’ (Sheba) in their homeland in Yemen: two fertile and productive gardens right and left. They were told “Eat of what Allah has provisioned you with and enjoy it, and be thankful to Him (by using this grace in the proper way).” A good country, (productive of incalculable good) and Gracious and Ever-Forgiving is the Lord.
    16. But they veered away (and declined to appreciate the condition of things and be sensible of Allah’s grace, and furthermore they failed to be grateful). Consequently, We sent against, the Flood of `Arim, a torrential rain that destroyed their dam and gardens, and We replaced their fertile land and their two gardens with two gardens of bitter fruit, shrubs of small tamarisk trees, and a few lotus trees and other trees carrying berry-like drupe.
    17. Such was the recompense We gave those who disbelieved and denied the favor and were ungrateful to Allah. But then We recompense only the disbelievers!
    18. Yet We kept the villages that stood conspicuous between their towns in Yemen and the towns We blessed. And We determined the distances and the units of time (to a scale inducing the feelings of comfort and safety), and We said to them, “You may travel by night or by day, you will be safe and secure.”   
    19. (But lacking patience and endurance, they, to their detriment, said,) “O Allah our Lord, make our stations distant and far apart and not close together (so that we may not see inhabited villages in our way to our stations.” In response to this request, Allah gave them what they asked) for, and they unjustly wronged themselves so. We made them the discourses (of the town existing then and of those towns existing thereafter). We tore them apart (while those who remained lived dispersed among the Bedouins in the desert and among other people elsewhere). These are signs to every patient person who is thankful to Allah.
    20. And sure enough, Satan did prove true his thought he would be able to lead them (to their loss in the maze of error). They followed him except those a group of the believers.
    21. In fact, Satan had no authority to subdue them but that We would know him who believed the fundamental truth of the hereafter and those who are in doubt of it. And Allah your Lord is Ever-Preserving over everything.
    22. Say to them, Prophet, “You may invoke those that you presume (to be gods) besides Allah (to either benefit you or ward harm off you. And they will not respond to you because) they do not possess even as little as an atom in the heavens and the earth, not to mention an association or a share of it. (And Allah is Absolute and Independent;) He needs none of them to offer Him backing.”
    23. Nor will intercession have profit with Him on the Day of Judgment except from those permitted. And when the overwhelming effect of terror is eased off and the hearts calm down, the disbelievers will ask one another, “What was it that Allah, your Lord, said?” They will be told, “He said the truth and permitted whom He favored to intercede. And He is The Ever-Exalted, Most High and Most Great (Who permits whom He wills and rejects whom He wills as He wills).”
    24. Say to them, Prophet, “Who provides you with livelihood from the heavens and the earth?” And tell them, “It is Allah Who provisions you from both of them.” And tell them, “Some of us are treading the path of truth and guidance and the others are in evident error.”
    25. And tell them, Prophet, “You will never have to answer for what we committed nor will we have to answer for what you did.”
    26. And say to them, “Allah, our Lord, will bring us all to assemble before Him on the Day of Judgment and then He will arbitrate our case with truth and justice. He is the Arbiter, Who resolves matters and brings them to a decision, and He is All-Knowing (of our deeds and of your deeds).”
    27. And say to them, “Would you show me those deities that you associate with Him and share (His divine nature! He has no partner). No, indeed, He is Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise (in all that He decides).” 
    28. We have not sent you, Muhammad, to mankind at large but a bearer of glad tidings to the believers and a warner to the disbelievers, but most of mankind do not know.
    29. (They doubt judgment) and they ask, “When will that promise of judgment be fulfilled and we enter the Hellfire and you enter the Paradise, if indeed you are sincere?”
    30. Say to them, Prophet, “You have a predetermined point in time which you cannot bring into effect earlier nor one hour later.”
    31. Pitifully, the disbelievers declare, “We will not believe in this Qur’an nor the preceding Scriptures regarding what they call for.” If you could see the unjust wrongdoers when they stand before Allah their Lord for judgment, you will see them reproaching each other. You will hear those who were deemed weak saying to those arrogant (whose pride consistently got the better of their prudence), “Had it not been for you, we would have believed in Allah.”
    32. Then those who waxed proud to those deemed weak, “Did we bar and hinder you from accepting the truth that came to guide you to all truth? The fact is, that you were criminals.”
    33. And the weak say to those who were proud, “But you took scheming, and you plotted day and night, and you commanded us to disbelieve in Allah and to associate other compeers with Him.” Deep in their hearts they feel remorse when they see the torment. We will fetter and confine the disbelievers with chains around their necks. Would they be recompensed but with what is commensurate with their deeds?
    34. We never sent a Messenger to a town to call them to the truth but those living in luxury said to him, “We disbelieve in your mission and we do not acknowledge the message you proclaim.”
    35. (And they added with pride,) “We are more affluent in wealth and in children and therefore we will not be subjected to torment in the hereafter.”
    36. Say to them, Prophet, “It is Allah my Lord Who outspreads livelihood generously to whom He wills (whether they be disobedient or obedient to Him) and He also gives with restraint and by measure to whom He wills. And this is not a sign of content or wrath. But most of mankind do not know.”
    37. Neither your wealth nor your children bring you in proximity to Allah. But those who believed and did righteousness will be requited with double the recompense commensurate with their deeds and will live safely and securely in stately compartments.
    38. And those who endeavor to oppose Our authoritative signs to defy Our divine revelations (and hinder Our prophets from communicating Our messages) will be consigned to the torment (laid upon the damned).
    39. Say to them, Prophet, “Indeed, it is Allah my Lord Who outspreads livelihood generously to whom He wills of His servants and restrains it for him if He wills. And whatever you spend in His cause, He replenishes it, for He is The Most Charitable of providers.”
    40. And remember, Prophet, that on the Day He musters them all (for judgment), He will say to the angels before those who worshiped them, “Are these who worshiped you?”
    41. “Glory be to You,  Allah,” the angels will say, “and extolled are Your glorious attributes. You are our Patron, apart from them (and they deceived themselves when they thought they worshiped us). They worshiped the jinn; most of them believed in them.”
    42. So today, on the Day of Judgment, none of you can avail profit or harm the others. We will say to the unjust wrongdoers, “Now taste the torment of the Fire that you had consistently cried lies to.”
    43. Yet when Our clear and lucid verses (signs) are recited to them, they say, “This man (Muhammad) is no more than someone who intends to bar you from what your fathers were worshiping.” And they add, “This Qur’an is nothing but fabricated falsehood.” And the disbelievers said of the truth when it was presented to them, “This is nothing but evident sorcery.”
    44. But Allah never sent or revealed divine Books for them to study. Nor did We send to them before you a messenger and a warner.           
    45. Those who preceded them acted similarly. They cried lies to Our divine message (and they rejected the truth); whereas the disbelievers of your people have not attained one tenth of what those of old attained (in knowledge, wealth, power, and the art of construction). They cried lies to My messengers, and how evil was the reproach for which they were destined!
    46. Say to them, “I admonish you to accomplish one thing, to sincerely think about this one single fact: you stand before Allah in pairs to reason with one another and singly, and meditate that there is no madness in your companion (the Messenger Muhammad); he is but a warner who cautions you against the severe torment you will face.”
    47. And say to the disbelievers, “I never asked of you a reward. My advice to you is entirely in your own interest, while my reward rests in the hands of Allah, Who witnesses all things.”
    48. Say to them, “Indeed Allah my Lord projects the truth (upon calumnies and overthrows falsehood). He is All-Knower of all the unseen and unknown.”         
    49. Say to them, “The Truth has finally come, and now, what can falsehood do but vanish, and what can it start or bring back?”
    50. Say to them, “If I should err away from the truth, then I will have hurt my own self. And if I am guided to the path of righteousness leading to the truth, it is only because of what my Lord reveals to me. He is All-Hearing of my words and yours and Ever-Near.” 
    51. And if you could see how terrified they will be when the Truth comes along. No eluding can they make and they will be seized in the proximity (of Hell).
    52. And they will say when they see the torture, “We believe in the truth.” But how can they attain faith and belief in the hereafter, which is so far away from here below where they had the opportunity to attain it but they did not?
    53. They disbelieved in it before and they slandered what is unknown or unseen while they were far distant (in the world of life below)!
    54. And now a barrier comes between them and their wish to attain faith now (in order to escape the torment of the fire facing them) exactly as earlier befell their sects who proclaimed their faith when it was too late. They all were suspicious of the truth that they considered doubtful.

