SURAH 35
FATIR
Originator
Revealed in Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah begins by praising Allah, the Creator of the heavens and earth, Who designated the angels as envoys furnished with pairs of wings to His servants. Nobody can impede the favor He extends to His servants, nor can anybody extend what He impedes. He reminds the people to mention His grace, as there is no other creator besides Him who can provision them, nor is there another god to whom they can turn. Your people, Prophet, rejected your call. Therefore, remember what happened to the messengers We sent before you, and take refuge in Our promise that all will be assembled before Us. It is incumbent on mankind not to be deluded by this life below with its ornaments, nor to be deceived by Satan, who only leads those who follow him to destruction and Hellfire. Not equal are those whom Satan enticed and those whom he could not entice. If this is the case, never feel sorry for the disbelievers, Muhammad, because the One, Who sends the clouds with rain to revive the dead land, revives the dead people for requital. He who seeks guardianship, let him take refuge in Allah, and he who takes refuge in other deities but Allah is humiliated by Him. The people’s works ascend to Him, and He accepts those of the believers and rejects those of the disbelievers. 
    Allah raised the people by special creation from dust; then He made them develop from emitted fluid, and He made of them two sexes, male and female. And no female—human or animal—conceives or gives birth but He knows of it. He created the fresh and the salty water from which people get their providence. And He causes the night to absorb into the day and He causes the day to absorb into the night, and He reduces the sun and the moon to a state of subservience, each running its orbit for a determined period of time. This is Allah your Creator, Who has the sovereignty of the universe; but those you invoke besides Him do not own, and if they are invoked, they do not hear your invocation. And if they heard, they could not respond. And on the Day of Judgment, they will deny what you associated with Allah. Allah is Ever-Just. He holds every self responsible only for its deeds, and He instructs the messengers to direct their call to those who fear Allah, for the mission of the messengers is to warn their people. And never was there a nation but had a messenger, a witness, and a warning.
    Then the surah returns to showing the signs of Allah’s omnipotence. Water gives rise to different fruits; mountains differ in color, white, red, and black; and so do people. All of that leads one to entertain the profound reverence due to Allah. And he who recites the Book of Allah, which He gave to whom He chose, will enjoy all that exists in Paradise. But he who denies Allah’s message will never perish in the end of time or suffer anihilation, nor will his torment be mitigated. He will ask to be sent back to this life below to do good, but he was given a long enough life to if he had been willing to open his heart and lift to Allah his inward sight! And he received Allah’s message. Besides, Allah has appointed you successors on earth, and He sustains and supports the heavens and keeps them from going out of order. Yet, the disbelievers solemnly declared that if there came to them a warning, they would be more prepared than those who were before them to acknowledge the message of truth. Yet when there came to them the warning, their attitude made them more averse and deserving of Allah’s wrath. If Allah requites the people with what is commensurate with their deeds, not one animate being would be left on earth. But He mercifully respites them to a predetermined time. When it is time, they will come to know that Allah is always All-Seeing. He keeps a vigilant eye upon all His created beings.
  
    1. Praise be to Allah (and extolled are His glorious attributes). He has originated the heavens and the earth and designated the angels as messengers furnished with pairs of wings in sets of two, three, and four. He adds, joins, or unites one thing to another at creation as He decides. Allah is, indeed, Ever-Determiner to do all things.  
    2. Should Allah open His gates of mercy to mankind (be it rain, favor, safety, or wisdom), no one can close these gates (or obstruct the flow of what He has permitted). And if He should withhold it, no one can accord it besides Him. He is All-Mighty and All-Wise. 
    3. O you mankind, remember Allah and His favor abounding in you by feeling grateful. And acknowledge that no creator exists other than Allah, Who provisions you with livelihood from the heavens (above) and from the earth (below)! There is no god except Him. Therefore, how could you diverged from acknowledging the oneness of your Creator and your Source of providence (and worship other deities besides Him)?
    4. And should they (the disbelievers) cry lies to the guidance you brought to them, Muhammad, be patient with them. So were messengers before you. They were cried lies to (but they remained patient till Allah’s victory came). And to Allah, the Ultimate Authority, are returned and submitted all matters and all affairs.
    5. O you mankind, rest assured that Allah’s promise (of resurrection, requital, and victory) is true. So do not let life below distract you from thinking of the hereafter, nor let anyone (Satan) delude you concerning Allah and the messengers (and to give you hope of forgiveness while insisting on committing sins).
    6. Indeed, Satan is your (avowed) enemy; therefore, consider him an enemy and deal with him accordingly. He incites his party and induces them, designating them as his adherents and destining them to the Blaze.
    7. Those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers must expect the strict torment; whereas those who believe in Allah and His messengers and do righteous deeds must expect forgiveness and an imposing reward.
    8. Does he whose odious deeds are adorned for him; so he sees them fair ones, compare with him who was guided by Allah’s guidance? Allah, indeed, misguides those who opted for the wrong path and guides to His path of righteousness those who opted for guidance. Therefore, Muhammad, do not let yourself be affected with regret (for their irreverent response to the divine Message). Allah is All-Knowing, indeed, of all that they do (and will requite them accordingly).
    9. Allah is He Who sends the winds to raise clouds. We drive them to a dead or droughty land where they pour their rainwater with which We revive the land after it had suffered death. Similarly We effect Resurrection (on the Day of Judgment).
    10. He who seeks might and power must seek them by obeying Allah, to Whom Might belongs and to Whom the good words mount. And He raises the pious act (which He welcomes in His realm of Heaven). And those who scheme odious deeds against the believers will suffer the strict torment; their scheming is futile.
    11. And Allah raised you, mankind, by special creations from dust (as He created your father Adam from it). Then He made you evolve from a sperm-drop, and He made of you two sexes, male and female. And no female—human or animal— conceives a seed in her womb or gives birth but it comes to His knowledge. Nor does he who reaches an advanced age proceed or recede in age but in accordance with what is in a Book, and this is easy for Allah.
    12. Nor do the two kinds of seas compare (according to Our knowledge and predestination although they have some benefits in common) one fresh and sweet, palatable as a drink, and the other salty and bitter. And from each you eat tender meat of fish and you obtain various kinds of gems you use as articles of ornaments for you to wear. And you see the ships (the large sea-going vessels and the river boats) moving through the waves and plowing the surface to help you accomplish your objects, seeking after His Grace, to the end that you may be thankful.
    13. He inserts the night into the day, and He inserts the day into the night (as He lengthens the time of one of them and shortens the other according to well fixed rules throughout times). And He reduces the sun and the moon to a state of subservience for your benefit, each running for a determined period of time. This is Allah your Lord, Who has the sovereignty of the universe and the Kingdom; whereas those you invoke besides Him do not own even as little as the integument of the smallest seed.   	 
    14. And if you invoke (those whom you worship besides Allah), they do not hear your invocation; and even if they heard it, they would not be able to respond. And on the Day of Resurrection they will disown your associating them with Allah. And no one can inform you of the truth as can He Who is All-Cognizant of each and every thing.
    15. O you mankind, you are so poor as to be dependent on Allah for livelihood and sustenance, and He is Ever-Affluent, Ever-Praiseworthy.
    16. If He wills, He could put you away and bring about a new creation (favored by His wisdom).
    17. And this is not a mighty thing for Allah.
    18. Nor would a self heavily laden with wrongs find a single one to disburden it of some of its wrongs. Not the least of its burden will be carried by anyone else, even if related by blood, for your admonition and warning, Muhammad, only take effect with those who entertain the profound apprehension due to Allah in their loneness and keep up prayers. For he who cleanses himself from sins will have successfully saved his own self, and to Allah is the final and inevitable destination.
    19. They are not esteemed alike, the blind (who lack intellectual and moral perception) and those who are ever-beholding;
    20. Nor the darkness and the light; 
    21. Nor the shade affording coolness and the heat.
    22. Nor do the living (who accepted faith) and the dead (who turned a deaf ear to the truth) compare. Allah’s voice reaches whom He decides, but your voice, Muhammad, will never reach those (who filled their hearts with denial and stubbornness, in the same way that it does not reach those) deposited in the graves.
    23. You are only a warner.
    24. We have sent you with the truth to all mankind to give glad tidings to those who believed and to warn those who disbelieved. And never was there a nation but had a warner.
    25. And if they cry lies to you, then those who preceded them cried lies similarly. They received messengers with the (divine message carrying) evidence sufficient enough to establish their authority to implement Our statutes and Our Scriptures as well as the Book of enlightenment and illumination.
    26. In consequence, I took away the disbelievers. And how unbearable and befitting was the disclaiming!
    27. Do you not see that Allah sends down from the heaven rainwater? So We bring out with it products from the soil in various colors (red and yellow, sweet and bitter). He made in the mountains streaks of varied hues: white and red, strong and weak, and black crags. 
    28. And of mankind, beasts, and cattle, variety in form, size, and color also. Thus, such of Allah’s servants who reflect on His creation and stand apprehensive of Him are the knowledgeable (who realize how great are the secrets of the creation). Allah is All-Mighty and All-Forgiving.
    29. Indeed, those who recite Allah’s Book, reflect on it, carry out its teachings, keep up prayer, and spend of what We provided them of Our bounty in Allah’s cause and in benevolence secretly and openly must expect a satisfying return for the never futile commerce they have between Allah and themselves.
    30. This is to satisfy their needs, to reward them with what is commensurate with their deeds, and to make His grace abound in them through guiding them to doing what increases their good deeds and obliterates their sins. He is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Thankful.
    31. And rest assured, Muhammad, that all that We reveal to you of the Book (the Qur’an) is, indeed, the truth. It corroborates and verifies the preceding divine Books and Scriptures revealed to the messengers before you. He is indeed All-Cognizant and All-Seeing (Whose constant vigilance is extended to all His creatures).
    32. And We made the Book a heritage that We have bequeathed to such of Our servants as We have chosen and elected. Some of them, the wrongdoers, are being unjust to themselves. Others choose a middle way between right and wrong, and some do vie by the grace of Allah in doing all that is good and charitable (and all that reflects wisdom and piety). This is, indeed, the sufficient grace abounding in whom He wills, as well as the efficacious grace that effects the end for which it is given.
    33. Such persons who vie in doing good are those who will enter in the Gardens of Eden (in which they will be destined to make abode) and in which they will be adorned with golden bracelets and pearls and dressed all in silken attire.
    34. They will say after entering it, “Praise be to Allah, Who has redeemed us out of all dread and sorrow and out of the insecure feeling and the grief of this Event. Allah our Lord is, indeed, Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Thankful.
    35. “So gracious He is as to make us inhabit in the eternal abode where there will be no touch of toil and we will be free from all touch of fatigue.”
    36. But those (disbelievers) will have to suffer the fire of Hell, and there they will never suffer death nor will their torment be lightened, for thus do We requite every disbeliever.
    37. While in the abysm of Hell, they will implore Allah in a loud (and excited voice), thus: “O Allah our Lord, bring us out of it. We will imprint our deeds with righteousness contrary to the wrong and the evil We did before.” But they will be told, “Did We not give you a life long enough to give a chance to him who was willing to remember? You received Allah’s messengers who warned you of this unbearable punishment! Therefore, taste the fatal consequences and so the unjust will have no vindicator.”
    38. Allah is All-Knowing, indeed, of all the invisible and the unknown in the heavens and on earth (and nothing escapes His knowledge). He knows all (private) thoughts and feelings that are in the breasts.
    39. He it is Who has appointed you successors on earth and made one generation inherit from the other (for inheriting and cultivating the earth. And He is All Worthy of praise, not denial). Therefore, he who disbelieves in the truth, then his disbelief will be against him, and disbelief adds nothing to the disbelievers’ debit in Heaven’s realm but hatred and detestation. And disbelief adds nothing to their fate but loss.
    40. Say to them, Muhammad, “Tell me, do you (disbelievers) see those whom you regard as your predominant associates and whom you invoke apart from Allah? Show me what (section) of the earth they have created, or do they have associating with Allah in the creation of the heavens? Or did We bring them a Book with evidence? The fact is that the unjust wrongdoers make promises to each other (that their deities will intercede for them), and they promise nothing but delusion.”
    41. Allah is He Who holds and supports the heavens and keeps them from ceasing to exist (and keeps them by His omnipotence from scattering in disorder). Should they be thrown about in disorder, no one else other than Him can restore them to order? He is always Most- Forbearing and Most-Forgiving.
    42. The disbelievers solemnly swore by Allah that if there comes to them a warner, they would be more rightly guided than any other nation. Yet when there came to them the witness and warner (from among themselves), that increased them in repulsion.
    43. Their rejection of the truth reflected their inordinate pride and their odious scheming; but scheming that is fraught with evil besets only those who take it for a sinister and crooked wisdom. Do they not see into the enactment of Allah with those of old and has long been pursued by Him—His just punishment! And you will not find a change in Allah’s mode of action that makes them hopeful for a different end, nor will you find mutation in His method of dealing with people (warning then punishing).
    44. Have they (stayed still and denied Allah’s warning to the disbelievers, and) not journeyed through the land and looked to see what was the end of those who preceded them—(who denied their messengers), albeit they were far mightier and more valiant than they! (Nonetheless, their might conferred on them no immunity against Allah’s punishment.) Nothing—irrespective of its nature—can stand in Allah’s way or impede His course of action or defy the laws and statutes of His realm in the heavens or on earth. He is always All-Knowing and All-Determining. 
    45. If Allah were to impose on mankind what is commensurate with their deeds, not one single beast would be left on the earth’s surface. But He mercifully defers them to a predetermined time, that is, the Day of Judgment. When it is time, they will come to know that Allah is always All-Seeing (keeping a vigilant eye upon all His created beings).

