SURAH 36
YA SIN
The Letters Ya Sin
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah begins with two letters of the Arabic language. Then it gives a solemn declaration that Muhammad is one of the messengers, who follows a righteous path delineated for him by the Qur’an, which was revealed to him by The All-Powerful and The All-Merciful to warn people whose fathers were not warned before. The surah depicts the disbelievers who did not benefit from the warning, for the warning only benefits those who set their face toward Allah and revere Him. It also assures that Allah brings the dead back to life and surveys the people’s deeds. Then the surah gives an example of the disbelievers of Makkah, which reflects the conflict between those who call to Allah and the deniers, and shows the end of both parties. Then it shows some signs of Allah’s omnipotence that compel people to believe in Him and fear His warning. They will be taken by surprise on the day when every self will be requited with what is commensurate with its deeds. And on this Day, those destined to the abode of Paradise will rejoice beyond a common joy; whereas those destined to the abode of Hellfire will be dismissed from Allah’s mercy, their lips will be sealed, and their hands will be endowed with voice. And if Allah wills He will change their features, for it is He Who substitutes the health of long-lived people for weakness, and their sound thinking for senility. It is He Who safeguarded His Prophet from delusion and dotage; He never taught him poetry, as it is totally improper for him. The Prophet only came with the logical, manifest divine message. 
    Then the surah mentions Allah’s favor on His servants: He subdued to them cattle and made them the owners and the riders of them; yet, people associate powerless creatures with Allah. Then the surah ends by drawing man’s attention to the fact that he was created from a sperm, yet he sets himself against Allah, Who brought them into being in the beginning, and displays his thought in his actions. Allah started creation from nothingness and rendered burning fire from the green trees. He Who has created the heavens and the earth is certainly able to bring life back to bones when they have decayed. Whenever it is His will to bring anything (animate or inanimate) into being, all it takes is to say “Be” and it is. Blessed be He and praise to Him Who has the glorious attributes, in Whose hands reside sovereign authority and the supreme controlling power of the whole and of all in all, and back to Him will all of you return.
   
    1. Y (ya). S (sin). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. And by the Qur’an, the prime source of wisdom (and useful knowledge),
    3.	You, Muhammad, are indeed one of the messengers (sent to the people with guidance and the true religion).
    4. And you are pursuing a straight Path (the religion of Islam).
    5.	A revelation sent down by The Ever-Mighty, The Ever-Merciful. 
    6. To warn people whose fathers received no messenger as a witness and a warning before; and they are heedless (of what they owe to Allah, to themselves, and to the people at large).
    7.	 Our Word of the majority’s aversion to the divine message has come true, do not believe.
    8. We have made those who insist on disbelief like those whose necks are surrounded with chains drawn up to their chins restraining the movement of their heads so that they cannot move their heads.
    9. And We made those who do not reflect on Our signs and revelation like those before and after whom We have erected a barrier so that they fail to see Allah’s marvels around them and in themselves.
    10. Such persons, Muhammad, whether you warn them (of impending danger and misfortunes or you do not); they turn a deaf ear and will not believe.
    11. Your warning will only be heard by those who follow the teachings of the Qur’an and is apprehensive of The All-Merciful in the Unseen. Announce to them joyful tidings of Allah’s forgiveness and an honorable reward.
    12. It is We Who give life to the dead and write down all they have advanced to their credit or debit—deeds, acts, thoughts, actions, and their tracks. And all have We registered in the evident Book.
    13. And recite to them about the inhabitants of the town to whom We sent Our messengers (an example by way of a parable).
    14. We sent to them two of Our men, to whom they cried lies. We reinforced them by a third who, together with the other two, assured them thus: “We have been commissioned by Allah and entrusted with His divine message.”
    15. But the inhabitants said, “But you are simply mortals like us; and never did Allah, The All-Merciful, send down divine knowledge. You are indeed liars.”
    16. And there the messengers said, “Indeed, Allah our Lord knows that we have been entrusted as Messengers with His divine message.
    17. “And we are responsible only for proclaiming His evident divine message distinctly.”
    18. But again the people said to the messengers, “We augur ill of you presaging some direful calamity. Therefore, unless you stop discoursing, we will pelt you with stones and you will suffer painful torment.”
    19. The messengers said, “You augur well or ill according to your disposition and your intentions. And do you people consider the truth that guides to all truth a presage of evil? You are but a people characterized by extravagance and transgression.”
    20. And there came a man from the far end of the city, moved with compassion for his fellow men to say to them, “O my people, obey them, they are messengers (entrusted with the truth that guides to all truth).
    21. “Obey them. They do not ask you for a reward or anything in return. They themselves are guided to all truth.
    22. “And why should I not worship Allah with extreme devotion,” he said, “it is He Who originated me, and to Him all of us will return.
    23. “Therefore, would I take apart from Him gods whose intercession, if ever permitted, is valueless nor can they protect me or save me from harm (should He, The All-Merciful, mean to make a misfortune or calamity befall me)?
    24. “For then if I take gods apart from Him, I would have been led in the maze of error.
    25. “I declare that I have believed in Allah your Lord, so hear me and obey my advice.”
    26. He was told (in reward for his faith and call to Allah), “Enter Paradise.” And there he exclaimed, “I wish my people knew
    27. “How Allah my Lord has forgiven me and made me among the honored.”
    28. We did not send after him a host from heaven against them, nor were We to mobilize Our angels.
    29. All it took was a single direful shout from Heaven that turned them (dead) as extinguished fire. 
    30. A great regret of (My) bondmen! No messenger We send as an envoy, but they used to mock him (and laugh him to scorn).
    31. Do they not perceive how many generations who existed before them We have caused to perish, and they have gone to where they will not return from!
    32. And all the preceding generations and those to come will be brought back to Us!
    33. And a visible sign of Our omnipotence and that We will resurrect them is the dead land that We revive and from its soil We cause grain to spring out for them to eat.
    34. And We furnished the land with gardens of date palms and vines and an abundance of flowing springs to gush forth.
    35. So that they eat of their produce, and of what their hands have made. (And none of these natural products was nor will be of their own making or their handiwork.) And so, will they not be grateful?
    36. Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes, Who created all the pairs of such things as the earth produces, and of mankind, and of what they do not know. 
    37. Another outward and visible sign of Allah’s omnipotence and existence is the night of which We strip the daylight and there they are driven into utter darkness.
    38. And the sun runs its course to its repository as determined by The All-Mighty, The All-Knowing.
    39. And for the moon, We have determined mansions or phases of the ecliptic which it occupies till it becomes like a shriveled and withered date-stalk.
    40. The sun should not run past its designated limit so that it does not overtake the moon, nor does the night outstrip the day, and each swims in its own orbit.
    41. Another outward, visible sign is that We carried mankind in ship loaded with them, their offspring (and their provisions).
    42. And We created for them the like for their ride (transport).
    43. And if We decide We drown them (for their sins), and no one would be there to hear their screaming, nor would there be an expected rescue.
    44. But We extend to them Our mercy and let them enjoy life up to a predetermined point of time.
    45. And when they are told “Regard with piety what awaits you hereafter and the retributive punishment which was inflicted on the nations before you, so that you might be recipients of Allah’s mercy” (they turn a deaf ear).
    46. And no divine sign of Allah be presented to them but they veer away from it.
    47. And when told to spend in benevolence of what Allah has provided them and given them of His bounty, the disbelievers say to the believers, “Shall we feed him whom Allah can feed if He wills? You must be in evident error!”
    48. “And incidentally,” they add, “When does that promise fall due, if indeed you are sincerely declaring the truth?”
    49. They wait only for a merciless shout to seize them while they are adversely arguing about mundane affairs (than to reflect on the hereafter)!
    50. And then it is too late to make any testament, nor will they return to their people.
    51. Then the trumpet is blown for resurrection and there they come out from the graves hastily and move quickly toward Allah their Lord. 
    52. They exclaim, “Woe to us! Who has awakened us from our sleeping place?” “This,” they are told, “is the Day of Resurrection that Allah The All-Merciful promised and the verity that the truthful messengers sincerely related.”
    53. Then, there is only one single shout, which raises alarm and incites them to action, and there they are presented before Us (for Judgment).
    54. On this Day no self will suffer injustice or be wronged in the least and you (people) will only be recompensed with what is commensurate with your deeds (be it good or bad).
    55. And on this Day those destined to the abode in the Garden will be cheerfully preoccupied with the world of supreme blessedness (in which they do rejoice beyond a common joy).
    56. And together with their spouses they will be reclining on luxurious couches in the shades afforded by trees and overshadowing foliage.
    57. Where they will enjoy fruit as well as all that they think of and whatever they ask for.
    58. They will be greeted with the expression of good will, “Peace,” from Allah the Lord, Who is indeed All-Merciful.
    59. And the disbelievers are addressed thus: “You, criminals, are excluded apart from the believers.”
    60. “Did I not,” says Allah, “covenant you, children of Adam, to not worship Satan, for he was indeed your evident enemy.
    61. “And I prescribed for you that you worship Me alone, for this was indeed the straight Path.
    62. “Indeed, Satan has succeeded in misleading a great multitude of you. Did you have no sense (to realize and confess yourselves mistaken when you obeyed him)!
    63. “This (as you can see) is Hell, which you have been promised for your disbelief.
    64. “As of this Day you will suffer its roasting effect and the torment that it lays upon the damned in requital of your disbelieving.”
    65. On this Day (of Judgment) We will seal their mouths and endow their hands with speech, and their legs they will be evidence of all they had earned.            
    66. And had We decided, We would have eclipsed their eyesight (in this life below), then they would have raced with each other to find the Path, but how could they have been able to see it!
    67. And had We decided, We would have transmuted them into ugly figures, despite the power and authority they had, then they would have been unable to move forward or backward (as We rendered them powerless).
    68. He whom We carry to advanced life We cause to relapse into a degenerate and degraded state. Do they not consider (that We are Omnipotent, and do they not contemplate that this life below is mortal and the hereafter is immortal)?
    69. And We did not teach Our Messenger poetry, nor does it befit him as a Messenger of Allah. What he says is, indeed, a divine Reminder and nothing but an evident Qur’an that is intelligible, imparting illumination and enlightenment.
    70. To warn those who are living and receptive to Allah’s commands, for which reason the Saying is justified against the disbelievers.
    71. Do the disbelievers not see of what Our Hands did that We have created for them cattle and made them the owners and the masters of them.
    72. And We made them (the cattle) subservient to them; some of them do they ride and of others they eat!
    73. And they order them in subservience to their profitable end (and design their skin for leather, fur for warmth), and drink of their milk. Do they not feel thankful?
    74. Yet they take apart from Allah other gods whom they regard with extreme devotion (and adore with appropriate acts and rites) that the gods might offer them victory.
    75. When in fact the false gods have no power to vindicate them ever (if Allah willed to inflict His wrath on them). On the contrary, it is the disbelievers who offer them protection like a camp of faithful hosts.
    76. Therefore, let not their disbelief in Allah and their accusing you of falsehood grieve you at heart. We do know what they converse secretly, and We are well acquainted with all that they say in public (and We will requite them accordingly).
    77. Does man deny Allah’s existence and omnipotence? And that We created him from a sperm-drop (the constituent part of emitted fluid)?  Yet he sets himself against Allah an evident adversary.
    78. And that aggressive antagonist draws meaningless parallels (to deny that We can restore dead bone to life), and he forgot that We created him (from nothing). He asks, “Who will restore life to these bones when they have rotted away?”
    79. Say to him, Muhammad, “He Who brought them into being from nothingness in the beginning will restore them to life, and He Who starts creation can re-create. He is All-Knowing of all that He created.”
    80. He Who rendered for you from the green trees fuel for fire (wood, coal, oil, gas) and you kindle from it.
    81. Is He Who has created the heavens and the earth (huge as they are), unable to create the like of them (weak as they are)? Indeed He is. And He is the Creator Supreme, All-Knowing.
    82. Whenever it is His Command to bring anything (animate or inanimate) into being, all it takes is to say “Be” and it is.
    83. Therefore, blessed and extolled be He and praise to Him Who has the glorious attributes, in Whose hands reside the sovereign authority and the supreme controlling power of the whole and of all in all. And all of you will return back to Him (so that He may requite you according to your deeds).
