SURAH 37
AS-SAFFAT
Those Ranged in Ranks
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah begins with a solemn declaration that many bodies of Allah’s creation drawn up in ranks arranged in even rows, taking a firm stand against evil and reciting the Qur’an, attest to His oneness. The very verses attest, that Allah is the Creator of the heavens, earth, whatever exists between them. He is the One Who decorated the lower heaven with stars and protected it against any irreverent creature. Having established the creed of oneness, the surah sets out to establish the belief in resurrection and threatens those who doubt, that it will take them by surprise while they are looking around. Then it presents some evidence of the possibility and easiness of resurrection. On the day when they will experience it, they will say, “This is the Day of Judgment.” They will be told, “This is the day of decision and segregation between the faithful and disbelievers, the day you have always denied.” The wrongdoers will be resurrected together with those they worshiped, inquiring, arguing, and accusing each other of being the cause of their calamity. Therefore, they share the punishment, as they showed inordinate self-esteem and refrained from worshiping Allah and accused their messenger of madness and insanity, when, to the contrary, he presented to them the truth, confirming the divine messages related to the people by the messengers who were sent before him.
    On that day, the true believers will enjoy all kinds of blessings and remember Allah’s grace on them, and look at the wrongdoers in the abyss of Hell. They praise Allah and extol Him for safeguarding and saving them from following the wrongdoers. Then the surah describes the dwellings of the wrongdoers and those of the believers, and narrates the stories of the preceding messengers to give support to the Prophet and admonishment to his stubborn people. After narrating stories of different events and times (in which the position of the message and messengers are clearly depicted), the surah refutes the claims of the disbelievers that to Allah belong the females and to them belong the males, and that He created the angels females, and that He has affinity to the jinn. Glory be to Him and extolled are His glorious attributes, Whose servants are the victorious, and Whose forces are the winners! When His punishment hits their courtyard, what an evil morning it will be. The surah ends with, Glory be to Allah, Whose divine and eternal nature excludes Him and absolutely exempts Him from the attributes they ascribe to Him. And peace be extended from Allah to all messengers. And praise be to Allah, Creator of the worlds.
 
    1. By those classes of My creatures who draw up in ranks ranging in even rows (observing worship and total submission).
    2. And by those scarers who scare (the wrongdoers in a way that keeps the universal system in order).
    3. And by those reciters who recite the Qur’an (with the aim of praising and extolling Allah).
    4. Allah your God is but One. (No one shares with Him in entity, action, or attribute.)
    5. He alone is the Lord and Sovereign of the heavens and the earth and of all that lies between (and He is their Supreme controlling power). He is the Lord of all eastern cardinal points (through the zodiac).
    6. We have adorned the vault of the lowermost heaven with the brilliancy and splendor of the inlaid planets (which differ in size and position and can be seen by naked eyes),	
    7. That are posted to serve also as sentinels against every insurgent satan.
    8. They are debarred from overhearing what is discussed in the august assembly of angels, being pelted with flames on every side,
    9. Fiery discharges rejecting them back not to listen to the heavenly news. That is in addition to what awaits them of eternal suffering of the lasting torment.
    10. And he who snatches whatever comes to his hearing of the secrets or future events is pursued by a piercing flame (that does not miss).
    11. Therefore, Prophet, ask those who deny resurrection and those who see it far from happening for a pronouncement—are they the more difficult to bring into being or the others of Our created beings (such as the heavens, earth, stars, and others)? We created them (mankind) from sticky clay (so why do they deny re-creating them)?
    12. And you, Muhammad, are filled with wonder at their denial of resurrection, while they scoff the issue and laugh it to scorn.
    13. And when reminded to acknowledge Allah’s omnipotence to resurrect them, they pay no attention.
    14. And when they see a sign attesting to these attributes, they urge each other to scoff.
    15. And the disbelievers say about the signs of Allah’s omnipotence, “This is nothing but sorcery made evident.”
    16. Maintaining the false dictum, they add, “How can we be raised after death and be restored to life after we have been reduced to dust and (disintegrated) bones!”
    17. “And does this,” they say, “also apply to our forefathers (who have long been disintegrated and strewed upon the surface of the earth)?”
    18. Say to them, Muhammad, “Yes indeed, you will be resurrected and you will be objected with multiplied wrongs and humiliation.”
    19. All it takes is only one single scaring inciting to action, and there they will get up and rise to see what they were promised.
    20. And there they (the disbelievers) will exclaim, “Woe to us, this is the promised Day of Judgment and Doom.”
    21. There and then they will be told, “This is the Day of Judgment and final decision (the Day on which the faithful are segregated from the disbelievers). This is the Day you have always cried lies to!”
    22. “O My angels, muster all the wrongdoers, together with their wives who lived in falsehood and with those they worshipped and adored.
    23. Apart from Allah, and guide them to the path of Hell-Fire;
    24. “But stop them here, for now they will be questioned (about their faith and their deeds).”
    25. They are asked, “How is it that you do not help and vindicate one another (here as you did below)?”
    26. On that Day, they submit and give themselves up into Allah’s power (and resign themselves to His command).
    27. They will ask and dispute with each other (and ask one another about their dreadful fate).
    28. Those who yielded to external influence will recriminate those who led them into error. They will say, “You always came to us from the right-hand side, which we presumed to be the way of moral rightness, but to lead us to the erroneous way.”
    29. “But,” the accused will say, “you yourselves were not believers (nor were you receptive of the truth).
    30. “Nor did we have authority over you to deprive you from your will. The fact is that you were an inordinate people given to transgression.”
    31. “And the word of Allah our Lord,” they will add, “which was predicted beforehand, has come true (that all of us will experience the taste of the punishment falling to us on the Day of Judgment).
    32. “We misguided you to the path of evil and wrongdoing (and you responded positively), for we ourselves were misguided (to mistaken and false beliefs).”
    33. Therefore, all those who called and those who responded will be partners on the Day of Judgment in what falls to their lot of the torment.
    34. For thus do We requite the criminals (who daily grow more and more wicked).
    35. When they were told in life “There is no god but Allah,” they responded with pride (and displayed inordinate self-esteem).
    36. And they said, “Shall we leave our gods on account of what has been said by a mad poet?”
    37. When, to the contrary, he presented to them the truth, the oneness (of Allah), confirming (the divine message related to the people by) the messengers who were sent before him.
    38. Then they will be told, “You (disbelievers) will certainly experience the taste of the painful torment.
    39. “And you will be recompensed in the hereafter with only what is commensurate with your deeds in the life below.”
    40. But excluded from torment in the abysm of Hell will be the bondmen of Allah (and sincerely conformed to His system of faith and worship).
    41. Such persons will be provisioned with what Allah has mercifully reserved for them (of expected grace and of what is replete with choice of all delights).
    42. They are presented with various fruits, and they will be treated with honor.
    43. In the beatitude of Heaven in the gardens of Bliss.
    44. Seated on beddings of dignity facing each other.
    45. Attended upon and served by young boys with a drink in the cup of joy procured from a spring flowing like a fountain.
    46. (Clear) white, delicious to those who drink it.
    47. That will not cause headache or danger that takes them by surprise, and will not exhaust the faculties.
    48. Companioned with maiden women of restraining gaze and gleaming eyes radiating splendor.
    49. Beauties who look as though they were clear, pure nested jewels white eggs affording keen pleasure to the eye (guarded under the shadow of a gracious wing neither touched nor stained).
    50. And there will the faithful ask one another in talk (of the why and the wherefore of past events in the life below).
    51. One of them said, “I had a comrade in the life below (who argued with me about religion and what the Qur’an stated),
    52. “Who used to say to me, ‘Do you sincerely believe in resurrection and its aftermath? 
    53. “‘Do you mean that when we die and are reduced to dust and disintegrated bones, we will be doomed and restored to life and have much to answer for?’”
    54. Then he said to those around, “Do you inhabitants of Paradise see those who made their abode in Hell, that I can see my companion in life?”
    55. And he looks, only to see him (his companion in life) in the midst of Hell-Fire.
    56. And there he exclaimed against his companion, “Good gracious, you almost succeeded in toppling me down (and an inheritor of Hell)!
    57. “Had it not been for Allah’s, my Lord's, mercy and favor that guided me to faith, I would have been among those brought forward to the pit of Hell.”
    58. “Is it then that, having died, we suffer no death,
    59. Other than that first death we suffered in the world below and we live from hence forever exempt from Heaven’s torment?
    60. “This gracious blessing that Allah has conferred on us in the Heaven is, indeed, great,” he will say, “and magnificent triumph!”
    61. For a like exalted end in the hereafter let the doers work.
    62. Nowþ is this delightful provision set for the inhabitants of Paradise better hospitality, or the evil fruit plucked from the horrible tree of Zaqqum (set for the dwellers of Hell)?
    63. The tree We caused to grow especially for the temptation in sharp tribulation and misery of the unjust wrongdoers.    
    64. It is a tree springing up from the pit in the abysm of Hell-Fire.
    65. A tree whose spathes are full of spikes looking as though they were the heads of devils (which the people have never seen).
    66. So the disbelievers will eat from it and fill their bellies of it.
    67. (And besides eating of the obnoxious tree of Zaqqum,) those disbelievers’ thirst will be quenched with a mixture of scalding water.
    68. They will be cast back into the abysm of Hell-Fire everlasting torment. (That is, they are brought from Hell to eat of the obnoxious tree of Zaqqum, so they eat from it and drink the boiling water, then are taken back to the abysm of Hell.)
    69. They found their fathers erring and treading the wrong path;
    70. So they hurried in their tracks.
    71. Most of those of old insisted on treading the path of error.
    72. We sent to those ancient nations messengers as witnesses and warnings (but they did not obey them).
    73. And there you can see the fatal end of those whom their messengers exhorted. 
    74. But excluded from that ill fate were those faithful bondmen to Allah.
    75. Nuh called out to Us appealing for aid, and how excellent was the divine response. (Then We destroyed his people by the flood.)
    76. And We delivered him together with his family from the agony of drowning and flood.
    77. And We destined his offspring to be the survivors (who inhabit the earth after the destruction of his people).
    78. And We praised his name to be honored by those to come in later generations.
    79. Peace be on Nuh and hailed will he be among the worlds (angels, mankind, and the jinn all together).
    80. For thus do We recompense those who perfect their fair toils and strive in Our cause.
    81. He was one of Our believing bondmen.
    82. And We drowned the others of his people (who were disbelievers).
    83. And among those of his sect (which mirrored Allah’s will and His religious principles) was Ibrahim (Abraham),
    84. Who presented himself to Allah his Lord with a sound heart.
    85. He rejected his father’s and his people’s system of faith and worship. He said to them, “What is it that you worship?”
    86. “Do you commit evident falsehood,” he said, “by worshiping gods apart from Allah the Creator, and you insist on that?”
    87. He asked, “What do you think, then, of Allah, the Lord of the worlds (yet you associate other deities with Him)?”
    88. He took a look at the stars (to elicit a sign of the existence of the Lord of the worlds).
    89. And there he exclaimed, “I feel really ailing (at heart of such irreverent society).”
    90. They (his people) turned their backs upon him and departed.
    91. Then he went apart to their false gods (before which food was set so that the people might be blessed by eating it) and asked them, “Do you not eat?”
    92. He asked, “What ails you that you do not talk or say something (to the purpose)?”
    93. He went apart and kept striking them with the right hand (the stronger one).
    94. Having found out that Ibrahim had destroyed, they hurried to punish him for his act.
     95. And there Ibrahim rebuked them, “Do you worship the stones and the material you carve with your own hands? 
    96. “When it is Allah Who created you together with all the elements you use in your handiwork (and He alone is worthy of worship)!”
    97. Offended, the idol worshipers decided to get rid of him, and so they said, “Build for him a chamber full of combustibles and cast him into the hell-fire.”
    98. And they thought of contriving against him, but Allah (saved him and conferred a high position on him and) made them the basest.
    99. And there when Ibrahim lost hope of their faith, he said, “I will settle where Allah my Lord commanded me. He will guide me (to the best abode and kindest place).”
    100. And he prayed, “I pray and beseech You, O Allah my Lord, to grace me with a son invested with righteousness and piety (who calls to You after I am deceased).”
    101. And there the angels announced to him the glad tidings of a forbearing youth. 
    102. And when the son attained maturity and was able to participate in his father’s divine service (the father was put to a test by a vision). He said, “My son, I saw in my dream that I slay you to Allah as a sacrifice and so, see what you see and what you have to say.” But the righteous son said, “O father, do what your Creator commands you, you will find me of the patient, Allah willing.”
    103. And when they both had surrendered to the course of action imposed by Allah, and Ibrahim had dashed him upon his brow (on the sand and took position to slay him),
    104. (Then it was clearly evident that Ibrahim had passed the test.) Allah addressed him, “O Ibrahim, 
    105. Your vision has been thus fulfilled (and you did not hesitate to accept Our will).” For thus do We recompense the fair-doers (who faithfully and sincerely give themselves up to Allah’s command).
    106. This trial (to which We put Ibrahim and his son) was, indeed, an evident trial.
    107. And We ransomed him (the son) with a great sacrifice: the slaughter of an animal [a ram] (by Allah’s command).
    108. And We praised his name to fame that he be honored by those later generations to come.
    109. A greeting of peace (and safety) be on Ibrahim. 
    110. With such recompense (that wards off evil) do We requite the fair-doers (who perfect their illustrious toils in submitting to Allah).
    111. Indeed Ibrahim was one of Our believing bondmen who submitted to the truth. 
    112. And the angels announced to him the birth of Ishaq [Isaac] (although he was desperate and his wife was sterile) who would be chosen as a prophet, one of the righteous.
    113. And We blessed him together with Ishaq. And of their offspring were fair-doers as well as those who were evidently unjust to themselves.
    114. And We made Our bounteous and efficacious grace abound in Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron).
    115. And We saved them together with their people from the tremendous agony (that was inflicted on them by Pharaoh and his people).
    116. And We made them the victors, and the overcomers.
    117. And We gave them the Evident Book (of enlightenment and illumination, the Tawrah). 
    118.   And We guided them to the Straight Path.
    119.  And We praised their names to fame that they be honored by those of later generations.
    120.  A greeting of peace (and safety) be on Musa and Harun.
    121. For thus We recompense the fair-doers (those who perfect their illustrious toils and their thoughts).
    122. They were among Our believing bondmen.
    123. And Ilyas (Elias) whom We chose to be one of Our Emissaries.
    124. He said to his people who used to worship idols, “Will you not keep in awe of Allah and entertain the profound piety due to Him?
    125. “Do you invoke the idol Ba`l (Baal) and leave out observing the worship of Allah, the Fairest Creator (Who perfected the creation of the world)?
    126. “Allah, your Lord, and the Lord of your forefathers.”
    127. But they cried him lies and by consequence, they will be brought to Hell (on the Day of Judgment).
    128. But excluded from that ill fate will be Allah’s faithful bondmen.
    129. And We praised his name to fame that he be honored by those to come of later generations.
    130. Peace be on Ilyasin (Elias).
    131. For thus We recompense the fair-doers (those who perfect their illustrious toils and their thoughts).
    132. He was one of Our believing bondmen.
    133. And Lut (Lot) is one of Our Emissaries (whom We entrusted to convey Our divine message to the people).
    134. We delivered him together with his family from the disaster that was inflicted on his people.
    135. Except an old woman (his wife) who was left among the laggards.
    136. And We destroyed all the others.
    137. And you (people of Makkah) go by their ruined dwellings and you see the fatal consequence in the morning, 
    138. And by night. So can you not reflect (on the calamity that took them for their disbelief)?
    139. And so was Yunus (Jonah). He was one of Our Emissaries (whom We entrusted to convey Our divine message to the people).
    140. He withdrew from his people without Allah’s instructions and boarded a fully laden ship. 
    141. He participated in casting lots and the lot fell on him and he was the one rebutted and thrown overboard.
    142. And there he was gobbled by the fish; and it was him who had incurred the blame (as he fled the call to Allah and was impatient).
    143. Had he not been one of those who humbly repented and constantly praised Allah and extolled His glorious attributes, 
    144. He would have remained buried in that grave (the belly of the fish) till Resurrection.
    145. And We flung him in the open on the naked shore, ailing and sickly.
    146. We caused a tree of gourd to grow over him (for protection from the bad weather). 
    147. And (when he was recovered) We sent him to people who numbered one hundred thousand or more.
    148. And they believed and by consequence, We made them enjoy life for a while.
    149. And now ask them (the disbelievers) for a pronouncement, Muhammad, “Has Allah, your Lord, chosen the daughters and left for them the sons?”
    150. Or did We create the angels females and they bore witness to their creation (and therefore they have ground for their belief)?
    151. Behold, indeed their intentional assertion of falsehood induced them to say,
    152. “Allah has begotten” (and make seem divine what is not). They are, indeed, liars (who shamelessly lie in the face of the clear signs of His oneness).
    153. Did He exercise choice and did He elect daughters to sons (while He is the Creator of both male and female)?
    154. What ails you people? How could your judge about such a proposition (which is clearly null and void)?
    155. Will you not remember His omnipotence (and, therefore, wronged yourselves)?
    156. Or do you have an evident authorization (to sanction this belief)?
    157. (If so) then produce your sacred Book if, indeed, you are declaring sincerely.
    158. And they (the disbelievers) ascribe to Him kinship to the jinn when the jinn themselves know that they will be gathered before Him for Judgment.
    159. Extolment be to Him! He is infinitely far above what they ascribe to Him.
    160. Excluded are those (of the jinn and mankind) who are faithful bondmen.
    161. And you (disbelievers) together with those you worship besides Allah, 
    162. You will not tempt any way from Him.
    163. Except him who will roast in Hell-Fire.
    164. “And there is none of us,” say the angels, “but has a place in a known station. 
    165. “We draw ourselves up in ranks arranged in even rows (to engage in the act of worship and in divine service).
    166. “And it is we who constantly celebrate the praises of Allah, and extol His glorious attributes.”
    167. Before the Prophet’s mission, the disbelievers of Makkah said, 
    168. “Had we received a Remembrance, a Book like the Scriptures of those of old (like the Tarwah [the Book revealed to Musa] or the Injil [the Book revealed to `Isa]), 
    169. We would have been of Allah’s faithful bondmen.”
    170. And when the Qur’an was revealed to them they disbelieved in it, but they will come to know (the end of their disbelief).
    171. However, Our Word was already proclaimed beforehand to Our bondmen Emissaries, 
    172. That they will certainly be granted victory over the disbelievers.
    173. And that Our hosts will in the end be the overcomers and the victorious.
    174. Therefore turn away from them, Muhammad, for a while (We will offer you victory and triumph). 
    175. But keep a beholding eye upon them to see their awful end for opposing and disbelieving you; meanwhile, they will see (what falls to their lot and the victory that Allah conferred on the believers).
    176. Do they seek to hasten Our torment?
    177. But when it comes down in their courtyard, what an odious morning will it be for those who were warned (and did not heed)!
    178. And turn away from them, Muhammad, for a while (until they are assembled before Him).
    179. And keep beholding; and they will behold (what can happen to them in this life).
    180. Extolment be to Allah, your Lord! He is the Lord of Might, above whatever they ascribe to Him.
    181. And peace be extended to all Emissaries (whom He entrusted with His divine message to relate to their people).
    182. Praise be to Allah alone, the Lord of the worlds.


