SURAH 38
SAD
(The Letter) Sad
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah portrays an aspect of the pagans’ arrogance and their antagonism to the Prophet’s mission, their envy of the Prophet for the message and for the Qur’an that Allah conferred on him. It refutes their false allegations and makes it clear that their false dignity and their love of opposition and discord were the main reasons for their fighting the message. Had Allah’s punishment been inflicted on them, they would never have taken the same stand against the Prophet.
    Allah gives examples of old to illustrate the consequences of disobeying Allah in order to restrain their arrogance and stubbornness and to support His Messenger to convey the message regardless of the troubles and affliction posed by the disbelievers he may face, and that he may thank Allah for the bounties conferred on him, as did the previous prophets and messengers. Then Allah mentions the grace that He has prepared for the believers and the dreadful abode He has prepared for the tyrants. He reminds them of what happened between their father Ibrahim (Abraham) and his enemy Iblis (Satan) to make them realize that it is in Satan’s character to call to them to ignore the truth, and it was the reason for his being expelled from Allah’s mercy.
    Then the surah ends with defining the Prophet’s mission to convey the message. He does not ask them for a price for it, nor does he assume it by himself without being entrusted by Allah. The Qur’an imparts divine knowledge and guidance to all the worlds, and they will come to know in due course the truth of its precepts.
  
    1. S (sad). A letter of the Arabic alphabet emblematic of the fact that the Qur’an cannot be emulated. And (by) the Ever-Glorious Qur’an (the absolute and undoubted truth) comprising the Remembrance.
    2. But dissenting from the truth are those disbelievers who take might in denying the truth and dissension.
    3. How many generations who came to this world before them did We justly caused to perish! In their distress they cried for mercy and help, but that was not the time for shirking (it was too late).
    4. Yet they (the disbelievers) wonder at the recognition of a warner who came to them from their midst and they say, “He is a sorcerer, a liar.
    5. “Does he proclaim the gods to be but one God? This is, indeed, a wondrous thing.”
    6. And the chiefs of falsehood among them exhorted their adherents to remain patient, constant, and firm in fidelity to their gods. They said, “This has been designed against us.
    7. “We never heard of a system of faith and worship being practiced by our fathers in this generation. This is indeed nothing but a made-up device. 
    8. “Was Muhammad of all of us preferred to be entrusted with the revelation of the Qur’an!” Allah says, “The fact is that they (the disbelievers) are in doubt of the Qur’an, and this is because they have not yet experienced the taste of My torment. They certainly will experience it.”
    9. We ask those who envy you, “Do they possess the vast treasuries of the mercy of your Lord, The All-Mighty, The Superb Bestower?”                                                                          
    10. We also ask them, “Do they have the sovereign kingdom of the heavens and the earth and of all that lies between them?” If so, then let them ascend the means (till they reach the realm of Heaven to accomplish their end if they can).
    11. They are but some contemptible host certainly destined to be routed, exactly as were defeated their likes of parties who confederated against the prophets.
    12. Long before them people cried lies to the divine message, like the people of Nuh (Noah), of `Ad, and of Pharaoh, owner of the bulwarks,
    13. And Thamud and the people of Lut (Lot), and the Companion of the Thicket (the people of Madyan), each and all of whom confederated as parties (against the truth as did your people).
    14. Each and all of them cried lies to the messengers of falsehood. Punishment was, therefore, justified.
    15. And what do these people (the Quraysh) expect but a single shout as loud as the trumpet’s blast with no recovery.
    16. And in their insolent challenge, they pray, “O Allah our Lord, let our sentence, our share of punishment be hastened on before the Day of Reckoning.”
    17. Be patient, Muhammad, and put up with what they insolently and defiantly say to you, and remember Our bondman Dawud (David), the man of physical strength in whom vigor and piety joined. He was always constant resorter (to Allah).
    18. We subjected for him the mountains to make use of their benefits while they extol Allah at nightfall and at the break of day.
    19. And the birds of different colors and kinds were mustered to him. Each and all resorted to his will (as he directed them to do good).
    20. And We strengthened his kingdom, and We brought him prophethood and the decisive rules of distinguishing right from wrong.
    21. Did you, Muhammad, get the tidings of the adversaries, claimant and the defendant who scaled the wall leading to Dawud’s private chamber (that he used for religious observances, not entering through the door)?
    22. They entered suddenly into the chamber, which alarmed him. But they reassured him and said, “Do not be afraid. It is only that we are two litigants; one of us has been inequitable to the other. Therefore, we expect you to decide our case with truth and without injustice and it is hoped that you will guide us into the level path of equity and justice.”
    23. “This is my brother,” the claimant said, “who owns ninety-nine ewes and I own only one single ewe. He asked me to entrust it to him and be her sponsor and got the better of me in speech.”
    24. And there Dawud said before listening to the defendant, “He, your brother, has been unjust to you, indeed, by asking you to add your ewe to his ewes. And many business partners are inequitable to their associates except those who believe and do righteousness, and how few they are.” There and then it occurred to Dawud that We had tempted him, and He invoked Allah his Lord for forgiveness and collapsed bowing down repentant. *
    25. We forgave him this (hastiness in executing judgment), and he enjoyed endearment and a high proximity and a fair resorting.
    
    
--------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    26. And Allah revealed to Dawud, “O Dawud, We appointed you to be a successor on earth; therefore, judge between people with the truth and do not follow a vain desire. Such an attitude takes you away from the path of righteousness, the path of Allah. Those who err away from the Path of Allah will suffer the strict torment laid upon those who have forgotten the Day of Reckoning.”
    27. We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them untruthfully, as the disbelievers have surmised. (They brew falsehood and think falsehood.) Woe to the disbelievers from the Fire!
    28. Or will it be (appropriate to Our wisdom and equity) that We requite the righteous believers as We requite those who corrupt on earth? Or do We requite the pious as We requite those impious (who rebel against Our judgments)?
    29. This Qur’an is a Book We have revealed to you, Muhammad, invested with blessings so that people might ponder its precepts, signs, and revelations and that people of intellect and understanding may remember.
    30. We bestowed Dawud with (the privilege of begetting) Sulayman (Solomon), an excellent bondman, who was a constant resorter.
    31. Remember that when displayed before him (Sulayman) at eventide were the finest breed of light-footed coursing horses.
    32. Sulayman said, “My love for the chargers has been inherent in me (due to the vital part they play in Allah’s cause) and they kept me from my remembrance of Him.” He kept admiring them until the sun disappeared behind the curtain (of night).
    33. There did Sulayman order, “Bring them back to me.” And he kept striking their shanks and necks.
    34. We decided to tempt Sulayman (so that he may not be deceived by the splendor of his kingdom). So We seated upon his chair a corporeal form [a devil] (and deprived him of the ability to manage his kingdom’s affairs). Thereafter he became penitent. 
    35. He prayed, “I pray and beseech You, Allah my Lord, to forgive me and to bestow on me a kingdom such as none else after me will be fit to have. You are The Supreme Bestower (of the gratuitous blessings of Heaven).”
    36. And there We subjected the wind and We made its activity subservient to his command. It flowed gently to wherever he rejected it and it yielded to his demand.
    37. And those among the jinn characterized with satanic attributes We also subjected to him, comprising every builder and every diver (in the deep seas).
    38. And others of those satanic jinn bound together with fetters (to restrain their evil).
    39. This, We said, is Our bestowal, Sulayman. You have a free hand; you may be bounteous or withhold without any reckoning.
    40. And for him is near proximity and fair resorting.
    41. And remember, Muhammad, Our bondman Ayyub (Job). He invoked Allah his Lord, that the devil had touched him with calamity and torment.
    42. And there We turned to him in mercy and We said to him, “Scamper the ground with your foot (leg) and there you will have a flowing stream of cold water to wash with and to drink from. (Here and then you will recover.)”
    43. We bestowed on him his family and the like of them to gather around him again (after they had forsaken him) in mercy from Us and as a reminder of Allah’s omnipotence and mercy to those who reflect.
    44. Ayyub had made a solemn oath that he would beat one of his family members (his wife) a number of strokes. And that he might fulfill his oath, Allah revealed to him to hold in his hand a jumble of rushes of the same number as the strokes he intended and to strike that family member with it once and gently, thus to avoid breaking his oath. This is because Allah found him patiently enduring affliction (and unwearied in the face of difficulties and hardship). How excellent a bondman he was and how humbly he resorted (to Us).
    45. And remember Our bondmen Ibrahim (Abraham), Ishaq (Isaac), and Ya`qub (Jacob), who employed their hands in all that conformed with Our commands in this life and the hereafter, and they were people of beholdings.
    46. We endowed them with the attribute that was exclusively claimed by them of constantly remembering the Residence, the Hereafter (and reminding people of it).
    47. And they are with Us among the elect and the select and are the most charitable.
    48. And remember Isma`il (Ishmael), Ilyasa` (Elisha) and Thul-Kifl. Each and all are among the most charitable.
    49. This narration is an exhortation reminding you and your people of Allah and of His favors. And those who are pious must expect a fair resorting (in the realm of heaven).
    50. Widely open for them will be the gates of the Gardens of Eden (where they will be heartily welcomed).
    51. Reclining therein, they will ask for fruits that are available in plenty and for the drink (of their choice).
    52. Accompanied by beautiful women who restrain their glances only on their mates, women of a similar age.
    53. This is a picture of the grace you people are promised on Day of Reckoning.
    54. This is Our provision of victuals, the stores of which will never be depleted.
    55. (This grace is only for the pious.) In contrast is the resort of the tyrants who grow daily more and more wicked. How evil will be their resorting!
    56. In the abysm of Hell they will roast, and how miserable is the cradling they have made for themselves!
    57. Scalding water of extreme heat mixed with the pus of Hell dwellers, they will be commanded to taste it,
    58. In addition to other torments of similar sort paired together.
    59. When the tyrants, leaders of falsehood, will be told, “Here is another troop rushing along to join you in Hell.” Then they will reply, “They are not welcomed in the beatitude of Heaven but they will be roasted in the Fire!”
    60. “You are not welcomed here either,” say the followers. “You brought this evil destiny upon our heads; therefore miserable is the reposing.”
    61. And in Hell they will add, “O Allah our Lord, would You requite those who brought upon us this misery with double the torment in the Fire.”
    62. And in their wonderment they will say, “Why do we not see those men whom we count as men of evil?” (That is, the poor Muslim fellows.)
    63. “Did we esteem them men of evil wrongly and unjustly we laughed them to scoffing, or have our swerved (in the wrong direction)?”
    64. How true is the adversariness among the inmates of the Fire!
    65. Say to them (the disbelievers), Muhammad, “You people must realize that I am only a warner, and that there is no god worthy of worship but Allah, the Creator, The One (and Only, The Unique, The Supreme), The Vanquisher.
    66. Sovereign Supreme and Lord of the heavens and the earth and of all that lies between them, The All-Mighty, Oft-Forgiving.
    67. Say to them, Muhammad, “It is, indeed, a magnificent tiding in the divine message I brought to you. 
    68. (A great divine message) that you veer from.
    69. “I have never known what was discussed by the exalted chiefs in the realm of Heaven [the angels] when they were adversaries about Adam (and I have not been educated in the normal way that people are—that is, reading books or taught by teachers—but I only receive revelation).
    70. “What is revealed to me indicates precisely that I am only an evident warning (held responsible for the proclamation of Allah’s divine message to each and all) in the evident words.”
    71. For once did Allah proclaim to the angels a great event. He said, “I am creating a human from clay (that is, Adam).”
    72. And when I have molded him and breathed into him of My Spirit, then fall down prostrating yourselves to him (in reverence and admiration).		
    73. There and then did all the angels prostrated themselves, 
    74. Except Iblis (Satan), who demurred in pride and was one of disbelievers.
    75. “What prevented you, Iblis,” said Allah, “to prostrate yourself to what I created with My Hands? Were you trying to take pride or are you of the exalted?”
    76. “I am better than he,” said Iblis. “You created me from fire; whereas You created him from caly?”
    77. “Then get out of it! You are outcast” (said Allah to Iblis in requital of his arrogance and disobedience).
    78. “You are stamped with My curse and consigned to evil until the Day of Doom.”
    79. And there Iblis said, “Then give me respite, O Allah my Lord, till the Day they are resurrected.”
    80. “You are respited,” said Allah, 
    81. Till the predetermined Day ascertained (for Judgment).”
    82. And there Iblis said, “By Your Might, I will misguide each and all of them, 
    83. Except those of Your bondmen who are faithful (and do not consent to temptation; I have no authority over them).”
    84. “In truth,” said Allah, “and I declare nothing but the truth, 
    85. (Your disobedience has made you a great loser) I will fill with you and with each and all those who follow you. (No distinction is made between a leader and a follower.)”
    86. Say to your people, Muhammad, “I do not ask you for any reward, nor am I one of the pretenders.
    87. “This is indeed a Qur’an imparting divine knowledge and Reminder to people at large.
    88. “And you people who refuse to acknowledge it will come to know in due course the truth of its precepts, of its premises and promises, after a while.”


