SURAH 39
AZ-ZUMAR
The Throngs
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed in Makkah except for, it was said, three verses: 52, 53, and 54. It begins with exalting the Qur’an, calling people to worship Allah alone, and refuting the allegation that Allah has a son. Then it shows Allah’s omnipotence as exemplified by the creation of the heavens, the earth, and mankind. It also shows that if the people deny Allah or display ingratitude to Him instead of being thankful to Him for His favors, then they must realize that He is Absolute and totally Independent of them. It does not please Him to see those whom He created to worship Him deny Him, disobey Him, and display ingratitude. Conversely, it pleases Him if you are thankful and your deeds reflect your gratitude. Then it presents two of man’s attributes in two situations: When misfortune or calamity befalls man, he invokes Allah, his Lord, turning to Him exclusively. And when Allah extends to him His mercy and grace, man forgets and is heedless of Allah as though he had never invoked Him for relief a short time ago.
    Then it compares one who is wary of the Hereafter and hopes for Allah’s mercy and blessings with one who is heedless of it all, and the requital prepared for each on the Day of Judgment. It reminds the people of Allah’s favor on them, as He sends down the rain with which He revives the dead land and grows the plants in different phases. It is a warning only for those who exercise their intellect and lift to Allah their inward sight.
    The surah then goes back to talking about the Qur’an and its influence on those who worship Allah, and that Allah has given them the examples so that they may reflect. And He has revealed to them the Qur’an, well founded, constant, and resolute; a Qur’an that does not allow in its structure obliquity or crookedness so that they people may keep in awe of Allah and worship Him. Then it compares the faithful and the disbelievers, stressing that they are not equal, and states that death is the destined end for all mankind. And on the Day of Resurrection, all of them will contend before Allah with opposing arguments and they will altercate among themselves.
  
    1. The sending down of the Qur’an is from Allah in complete glory, featuring Him as The All-Mighty (Whose will nobody can impede), the All-Wise in His actions and ordinance.
    2. We have sent down to you, Muhammad, the Qur’an with the Truth, therefore worship Allah, faithfully devoting to Him alone all religious rites.
    3. To Allah alone belongs the faithful religion! And the disbelievers who take patrons apart from Him to help them say, “We do not worship them as creators, but to (intercede on our behalf and) bring us in proximity to Him.” Allah will judge between them and the believers on the Day of Judgment on matters with which they differ. Indeed, Allah does not guide to the truth the one who gives himself up to lying and disbelief.
    4. Had Allah willed to take a son He would have elected as He decided of those whom He created. Hymned be He! He is Allah, The One, The Superb Vanquisher. 
    5. He created the heavens and the earth and brought them to existence in conformity with truth. He rolls the night over the day-time and He rolls the day-time over the night. And He rendered the sun and the moon subservient to His will, each in its own orbit for a predetermined time (that is, until the Day of Resurrection). He alone is, indeed, The All-Mighty, and The Oft-Forgiving.
    6. It is He Who created you from one single self (Adam), and from him did He make his mate Hawwa’ (Eve). And He sent down to you eight heads of cattle. He creates you in the wombs within your mothers’ bellies in stages of development one stage after another in the depth of darkness environed by three dark compartments. This is Allah your Lord, Who has the rightful claim to the Kingdom. There is no god but Him, so how could you turn away?
    7. If you people disbelieve in Allah, then (you must realize that) He is Absolute and Ever-Affluent. He is not satisfied with disbelief for his bondmen. Conversely, it satisfies Him if you are thankful (and your deeds reflect your gratitude). And no self bearing wrongs bears in any way the wrong of another, and in the end all of you will return to your Lord. There and then He will inform you of all that you had done. He is, indeed, All-Knowing of all private thoughts and feelings in the breasts.
    8. And when an adversity touches man in this life, he invokes Allah his Lord turning to Him penitent. And when He grants him a favor, he forgets the misfortune he invoked Allah to deliver him from (and is heedless of Allah as though he never invoked Him for relief a short time ago). He sets up compeers to Allah to mislead himself and other people from His Way of righteousness. Say to them, Muhammad, “Enjoy your disbelief a little and rest assured that you will be among the dwellers of the Fire.”
    9. He who spends parts of the night prostrating and upright worshiping and submitting to Allah, remember Allah in standing, being wary of the Hereafter and hopeful of Allah’s mercy (and blessings)— compare him with one who invokes Allah when befallen with calamity and forgets Him when in well-being! Ask them, Muhammad, “Do they compare, those who know Allah’s ordinance and by consequence worship Him alone, and those who do not know?” It is only those who exercise their intellect will remember.
    10. Say to them, Prophet, “O you who believe in Allah, be pious to your Lord, Allah, and realize that those who do fair deeds will be requited with fair support in this life and Paradise in the hereafter. And never accept humiliation, for Allah’s land is so vast; and resort to patience when you depart from the land and beloved; the patient among you will be requited unexpectedly and without reckoning.”
    11. Say to them (the disbelievers), “I have been commanded to worship Allah and to make religion faithfully His.
    12. “And I have been commanded to be the first Muslim.”
    13. And say to them, “(I am fearful of offending Allah my Lord, for) if I were to disobey Him, He would requite me on the Tremendous Day of Judgment with the torment.”
    14. Say to them, Muhammad, “It is only Allah Whom I worship making my religion faithfully His,
    15. So, if you know my way and do not follow me, then you are free to worship whom you please apart from Him.” And say to them, “The big losers on the Day of Resurrection will be those who lost their own selves as well as their own people, and clearly this will be the evident loss.”
    16. Above those losers there will be overshadowing fire hanging over them (like a canopy of perpetual clouds of fire), and no less shadowings will there be underneath them. This is a picture Allah uses to frighten His bondmen. “O you, My bondmen, who should seek unto Me, keep in piety to Me.”
    17. And those who avoid worshipping the idols or Satan and are penitent to Allah in all their affairs must expect Allah’s joyful tidings; and therefore announce to My worshipers, Muhammad, the good tidings. 
    18. My worshipers who listen to the Saying and choose with deliberation the fairest course to follow. These are they who have been guided by Allah, and it is these who are endowed with intellects.
    19. Can you help whom Allah has justly destined to the torment of Hell (escape his destiny)? Would you be able, Muhammad, to rescue anyone in the Fire?
    20. But those who keep being pious to Allah, their Lord, are destined to take their abode in Paradise in high, beautifully designed chambers superimposed by chambers in luxuriously built mansions beneath which rivers flow, a promise made to them by Allah, and Allah never fails in His appointment. 
    21. Are you people not able to see that Allah is He Who sends down the rainwater from the heaven and dispatches its course through the earth to form springs and water channels, and by its means, He produces plants varied in color. Later on, they lose their bloom and their natural color. Then you see them heaving and turning yellow, and they shrivel and are crushed to pieces, a process serving as a reminder of Allah’s omnipotence to those who are with intellects. 
    22. Are people all alike? Will he whose breast Allah has expanded to Islam, so that he is in the Light of his Lord, compare with him who turned his back to Allah’s signs?  So, woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the Remembrance of Allah. Those are in evident error.
    23. In complete glory did Allah sent down the best discourse, the Qur’an, a Book whose words and meanings resemble each other and oft-repeated, which, when recited or listened to, evokes a quiver of the skins of those who are apprehensive of Allah their Lord. Then their skins and hearts calm and their skins soften at the Remembrance of Allah. This is the spirit of truth whereby Allah guides whom He will to all truth. And he whom Allah leads into error (owing to His Knowledge that he will astray) will never find anyone to guide him.
    24. Are all people alike? Does he who has his face to hopelessly protect him from the odious torments on the Day of Resurrection (compare with him who comes safe on the Day of Judgment)? There and then the wrongdoers will be told, “Taste (the consequences of) your earnings and deeds.”
    25. Those who preceded them cried lies, and they were seized with the torment. They were aware neither how it happened (nor from where it came).
    26. And there did Allah make them suffer disgrace in the life below, and greater will be the torment hereafter if only they reflected and knew. 
    27. And We have given in this Qur’an similitudes that remind them of the truth, with the aim that people may remember.
    28. The Qur’an was revealed in Arabic, well founded, constant, and without any crookedness, so that they (people) may be pious to Allah and revere Him (as it is His due).
    29. Allah has struck a similitude, for the disbelievers, an instance of a slave who serves many associate masters who are at variance. And another slave who is submissive to only one master. Are they equal? (Of course not.) Praise be to Allah (Who made the truth evident to the people), yet most people do not know.
    30. You, Muhammad, are to die and so are they. 
    31. Then on the Day of Resurrection, before your Lord, you will be taking adversary stands. 
    32. And who is more unjust than he who lies against Allah and lies to the truth when presented to him? But is there not lodging in Hell for the disbelievers?
    33. And he who has brought the divine message of truth to the people and those who have faith in it are those who keep in piety of Allah and revere Him.
    34. They will have what they decide in the Providence of their Lord, for this is the requital of the fair-doers.
    35. Allah has conferred on them such grace, for He will expiate for them their evil deeds, blot out their worst deeds, and recompense them for the best of what they had accomplished.
    36. Allah alone is enough to suffice His worshiper’s needs of defense, protection and necessities of life. Yet the pagans frighten you, Muhammad, from their gods that they worship apart from Allah. In reality, he whom Allah justly sends into error (for He knows beforehand that he will prefer going astray to being guided) will find no one to guide him to the path of righteousness.
    37. And he whom Allah guides (and directs to His path—for He knows beforehand that he will prefer guidance to going astray)—no one can mislead him. Is Allah not All-Mighty and Able to avenge His right (and protect His servants against His enemies)! 
    38. And if you should ask them (the disbelievers), Muhammad, who has created the heavens and the earth, they will say “Allah.” Then say to them, “Have you seen that those whom you invoke apart from Allah—will they be able to protect me should Allah decide to do me adversity? Or if He means to extend to me His mercy and blessings, can they hold back the flow of His mercy or be able to withhold it?” Say to them, “Allah is enough for me, those who entrust to Him themselves and their affairs must trust in Him.”
    39. Say, “O you people, you may work your own way of disbelief; I am working my way by guidance from Allah, my Lord. 
    40. To whom will come the torment disgracing him and suffer the everlasting retributive torment.”
    41. We have sent down to you, Muhammad, the Book (the Qur’an) to  relate its context of truth to mankind in truth. And he who accepts guidance will have profited his own self and he who errs into falsehood will have erred against himself. And you, Muhammad, are not a trustee over them. (You are only entrusted to convey the message, and you have done.)
    42. Allah takes up the nafs (self) at the time of death and the other selves during sleep. He holds back the nafs destined to die and sends back the other (to embody its material being) for a predetermined point of time. These are signs for a people who meditate. 
    43. Or do they (the disbelievers) take apart from Allah other gods to intercede on their behalf? Say to them, Muhammad, “(Do you really mean it,) even though they are destitute of power as well as of the consideration which is Allah’s given gift?”
    44. Say to them, Muhammad, “To Allah alone belongs the command of permitting intercession (by whom He wills on behalf of whom He wills). And it is only to Him that the Kingdom and sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs, and in the end all of you will return to Him (to requite you according to your deeds).”
    45. And when the Name of Allah alone is mentioned, those who deny the hereafter grow peevish and their hearts come to be filled with disgust, whereas when other objects of worship (their false gods) apart from Him are referred to, they rejoice.
    46. Say, Muhammad, setting your face to your Creator, “O Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, All-Knowing of the invisible and the unknown as well as of the evident and the witnessed. You alone judge between Your bondmen on matters wherein they used to differ.”
    47. And if the unjust wrongdoers were to own all that is on earth and as much of the same, they would be glad to offer it on the Day of Resurrection in ransom of their guilt and of the odious torment. There will appear to them Allah’s punishment that they never reckoned would happen.
    48. And the odious deeds they had earned will appear to them, and they will be beset on all sides by the punishment they had mocked.
    49. And when man is touched or befallen with an adversity or a calamity, he invokes Us for relief. And when We grant him a divine favor from Us he says in response, “I have been brought what comes into my possession by reason of the knowledge (of how it can be attained).” In effect, the favor and prospering influence We bestowed upon him was simply a temptation (aimed at distinguishing the obedient from the disobedient), but most of them do not know.
    50.  In a similar manner did those before them say the same, and by consequence, it did not avail them (from Allah’s retributive punishment).
    51. And in consequence did the odious deeds they committed afflict them. And similarly will the odious deeds of the wrongful among those of the present afflict them. And they (these and those) are not in a position to be defiant of Allah’s punishment.
    52. Do they (the disbelievers) who said that not know that Allah is He Who outspreads livelihood generously to whom He wills, and He also gives with estimation and by measure to whom He wills. Indeed, there are in this presentation enough signs promoting contemplation for people who believe.
    53. Say, Muhammad, (what Allah says): “O My bondmen who have carried disobedience to excess, do not feel despondent of Allah’s mercy; Allah forgives all guilts. He is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    54. Therefore, be penitent to Allah your Lord (with the intention to amend your wrongdoings), and to surrender to Him before you are confronted with the torment and no one can vindicate you or help you.
    55. And follow the fairest course revealed to you by Allah your Lord in the Qur’an, before you are suddenly confronted with the torment, while you are not aware.
    56. (Stand repentant to your Creator, submit your will to Him, and follow His teachings) so that a sinful self may not express regrets in words, thus: “Woe to me for the duties owed to Allah that I neglected, and woe to me for disregarding His noble discourse that I scoffed.”
    57. Or it would say, “Had Allah guided me to His path I would have been among those who are pious to Himis dueHis  .”
    58. Or it might say when it sees the torment (laid upon the damned), “If only I could be given the recurrent chance to relive my life again down below so that I would be among the fair-doers!”
    59. Such person will be told, “Yes indeed, but there came to you My signs (which were related to you by My messengers). You cried lies to them and your pride got the better of your prudence; you displayed inordinate self-esteem and were a disbeliever.”
    60. And on the Day of Resurrection you will see the faces of those who lied (and related falsehood) to Allah how they will assume blackness (expressive of the grief and distress falling upon them). Is there not enough lodging in Hell to accommodate all those proud ones!
    61. Allah will deliver those who were pious to their land of triumph, and never will they come to suffer odious (torment), nor will they grieve (for losing a favor they hoped to gain).
    62. Allah is He Who created everything and He alone is the Trustee of the whole and of all in all.
    63. To Him is attributed the prerogatives over all that exists in the heavens and on earth. (No one besides Him has any authority over them.) And those who disbelieved in Allah’s signs and revelations are they who will suffer the heaviest losses.
    64. Say to them (the disbelievers), Muhammad, “Do you (having seen all these clear signs of Allah’s oneness), command me—you people who are destitute of knowledge—to worship anyone other than Allah (the Creator of the universe)?”
    65. We have revealed to you, Muhammad, as We have revealed to those messengers sent before you: if you associate other deities with Allah, Allah will frustrate your deeds to worthlessness, and you will be with those who will suffer the heaviest losses.
    66. Do not pay attention, Prophet, to what the disbelievers asked you for. It is only Allah Whom you are commanded to worship, and be among those who are thankful.
    67. And the disbelievers have not estimated Allah with the truly estimated attributes as His own. The earth with all its contents will be under His grasp and command and His control on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens folded in His right hand. Praise be to Him Exalted and extolled are His glorious attributes! He is infinitely beyond all those they associate with Him.  
    68. The Trumpet will certainly be blown, and all those in the heavens and on earth will be stunned (into unconsciousness), save those whom Allah excepts as He wills. Then the Trumpet will be blown another time, and they will be standing upright looking.
    69. There and then the earth will be flood-lit with its Lord's (indescribable bright, shining, splendent) Light, and the archetypal Book of all records will be laid (wide open), and all the prophets and the martyr-witnesses will be brought up (to the august and ultimate judicial sitting), and the divine sentences will be decided with equity and truth, and no one will ever be unjustly wronged.
    70. And there, will each self have been requited in full with what is commensurate with its deeds, and Allah knows best what each has performed.
    71. And then will the disbelievers be driven in hordes to Hell. And when they have reached its gates, they are swung open (in Allah’s name), and there the keepers will receive them with a reproach for their disbelief. The angels will say, “Did you not receive messengers chosen from among yourselves to recite to you the divine revelations revealed by Allah, your Lord, and warn you of this eventful Day of Judgment?” “Indeed, they did,” the disbelievers will say. “But,” the angels will say, “Allah’s word proclaimed beforehand about the word of torment is now being realized by the disbelievers.”
    72. And there, they are told, “Enter, you disbelievers, into the gates of Hell to take your eternal abode (in its abyss).” Evil indeed is the lodging of the proud.
    73. And led to Paradise in hordes are those who remained pious to Allah their Lord (and revered Him). When they have reached its gates, which are now laid open, its keepers will say to them, “Peace be upon you (Allah’s devotees). You have been good. So enter it eternally abiding.”
    74. Those admitted to Paradise will say, “Praise be to Allah alone for the fulfillment of the promise delivered to us (by His messengers). He conferred on us the heritage of the Paradisiacal earth and supremely blessed land to occupy any part of it as we will.” How favorable is the reward of those who exert themselves for a truthful end!
    75. And you see the angels standing to attention around the supreme Throne extolling the praises of Allah. And judicial decision has already been given with equity, truth, and justice on all; and this will be said, "Praise be to Allah Lord of the worlds.”
