SURAH 40
GHAFIR
The Forgiving
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts, as many others do, with two letters of the Arabic alphabet. It starts with glorifying the Ever-Glorious Qur’an, which was revealed by The All-Mighty, The All-Knower Who forgives sins and accepts penitence, Whose punishment is tormenting, and Who has the rightful claim to omnipotence. Then it calls upon the people to acknowledge the oneness of Allah and not to be deceived by the power or authority the disbelievers may have, and it calls them to reflect on the end of the nations who were before them.
    Afterwards, the surah speaks about the carriers of the supreme throne and their praise and exaltation of Allah. And it depicts the status of the disbelievers and what besieges them of Allah’s wrath. It mentions in many places Allah’s signs of omnipotence that are mirrored in themselves and in everything around them in the heavens and on earth, and the grace He conferred on them. It also calls them to worship Him alone: “Therefore, dedicate themselves solemnly to Allah and reverence Him exclusively. … Invoke Me, I respond to your invocation. … This is Allah your Creator, Who created all things and brought them into being and caused their existence, there is no god but Him.” The surah in some other verses reminds them of the Last Day: “Warn them, Muhammad, against the approaching Day of Resurrection when the hearts sink, choking the breath, the tongue, and the utterance, connoting extreme fear that disables them to put to speak.” It mentions some aspects of the story of Musa (Moses) with Pharaoh and his people, especially the believer who belonged to Pharaoh’s household. Then the surah ends with calling the people to journey through the land and look with their minds and eyes to see what was the end of those who preceded them, and how the end of their disbelief was. When Allah’s punishment was inflicted on them, they said, “We believe in Allah alone and deny the deities we associated with Him before.” But it was too late. Their submission to Allah then and their acknowledgment of Him when they saw His severe punishment befalling them excluding or before forgiveness. This was a mode of requital by Allah and has long been pursued, and no one can change Allah’s Command.” When Allah’s punishment befalls them, the loss, then, falls on those who deny Him.
  
    1. H (ha). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters  from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. This is the Qur’an proceeding from Allah, The All-Mighty and The All-Knower of everything, 
    3.  Who forgives guilty deeds and accepts penitence of those who humbly repent, Whose punishment is tormenting, Who is Owner of abundance. There is no god but He. To Him is the Destiny.
    4. No one contends with opposing argument against Allah’s signs and revelations but those who disbelieve in Him, and so let not their prosperous commercial travels by Allah’s will—although they are disbelievers—delude you, Muhammad.
    5. Before these disbelievers, the people of Nuh (Noah) cried lies to Our message, followed by those who confederated against the messengers, and each of them plotted against their messenger to seize him, and they disputed with opposing argument to confute the truth. And consequently, there I seized them and brought them to ruin, and how unbearable was the punishment!
    6. Thus, as much as Allah’s word has come true beforehand against those who denied their messengers, Muhammad, that they were born to be the dwellers of Hellfire (for preferring disbelief to faith).
    7. Those angels who carry the Throne and those around it praise Allah, extol His glorious attributes, His supremacy and omnipotence, believe in Him, and invoke His forgiveness for those who believe. They supplicate thus: “O Allah our Lord, Your mercy is extended to the wide circle of all, and omniscience is your own. O Allah, forgive those who humbly repented and adhered to Your way of righteousness, and protect them from the torment of Hell-Fire.
    8. “O Allah our Lord, admit them into the blissful Gardens of Eden that You promised to them and to those who were righteous of their parents, their spouses, and their progeny. You are The All-Mighty and The All-Wise.”
    9. They also invoke Him: “And protect the believers from the odious deeds; for he whom You protect from his evil deeds then, You will have conferred Your mercy on him, and this is, indeed, the magnificent triumph.”
    10. Those who disbelieved in Allah will be called: “Allah’s detesting to you is far greater than your present natural aversions and antipathies among yourselves—aversions (actuated now by the status quo which you face resolutely), as you turned deaf to Allah’s message when you were called to it time after time and hurried to disbelief.”
    11. The disbelievers will say, “O Allah our Lord, twice did You deprive us of animate existence by death (once in life below and another in our tombs), and twice did You bring us into being and caused our existence (once in life below and another after resurrection). But is there a way out of this agony and torment?”
    12. This torment you are suffering is in requital of the way you conducted yourselves in life: When Allah alone was invoked, you disbelieved, and when others were associated with Him you believed. (By consequence, you deserve this requital for your disbelief.) But judgment rests in His hands, The Ever-Exalted, The Ever-Great.
    13. It is He Who shows you His signs (His marvels, and His revelations), and sends down to you from the heaven (rainfall, the instrument of sustaining life and) providing livelihood. But no one reminds himself except he who turns penitent.
    14. Therefore, invoke Allah and reverence Him faithfully, albeit this is hateful to the disbelievers.
    15. It is Allah Who owns High Degrees. It is He Who occupies the glorious Throne and casts the Spirit of His Command on whomever of His servants He wills and induces him to warn all against the Day when all will assemble for the Day of Encounter. 
    16. The Day on which they are fully exposed, and none of their aspects or secrets is concealed from Allah. There and then, they will hear a powerful voice: “To whom belongs the Kingdom, the domination and the supreme controlling power and absolute and independent authority?” And a decisive answer: “(They belong) but to Allah, The One and The Vanquisher.”
    17. On that Day (of Judgment), every self will be recompensed with what it earned. Judgment, then, is an expression of absolute justice; and Allah is indeed Swift in reckoning.
    18. Warn them, Muhammad, against the approaching Day of Resurrection when the hearts are close to the larynxes and they are repressing their anguish. There and then, the unjust will find no close friend or intercessor who could be obeyed.
    19. Allah knows the treacherous look of the eyes and what (thoughts and feelings) the breasts conceal.
    20. And Allah decrees with the Truth; whereas those whom they invoke apart from Him are incapable of administering right or justice. Indeed, Allah is All-Hearing and All-Beholding. 
    21. Have they not journeyed through the land and looked to see what was the end of those who preceded them, who were far mightier and who left more traces in the earth? But Allah seized them with a calamity and destroyed them in requital of their guilty deeds, and no guardian did they have to protect them from Allah.
    22. That penalty imposed on them was a result of their disbelief of clear evidences of His omnipotence and authority presented to them by their messengers. And He seized them (with a calamity and destroyed them). He is, indeed, All-Powerful. He punishes severely.
    23. We sent Musa (Moses) with signs, serving to demonstrate divine power and authority, 
    24. To Pharaoh, Haman, and Qarun (Korah), who called him a sorcerer and a great liar.
    25. And when he presented them with the truth from Us, they proclaimed, “Kill the sons of those who believed with him and spare their women.” But the plotting of disbelievers ends in error.
    26. And Pharaoh added, “Leave me to kill Musa, and let him invoke Allah his Lord (to deliver him out of my hands). I fear he might exchange your religion or cause corruption and discord to spring up in the land.”
    27. Musa said to Pharaoh and his people, “I have sought refuge in Allah my Lord, and your Lord, and your Lord, from every one who is arrogant and proud who does not believe in the day of Reckoning.”
    28. And there said a man of Pharaoh’s household, whose heart had believed but who had hidden his faith, “Will you kill a man just because he says the One Whom I worship is Allah my Lord while he has already brought you clear evidences from your Lord? And if he happens to be lying, he will only hurt himself. But if what he says is in conformity with truth, then some of his promises will alight on you.” Allah certainly does not guide (to His Way of righteousness) anyone who is extravagant and who lies. 
    29. “O my people,” he added, “today you have the sovereignty, the dominion, and the authority. You have acquired supremacy and pre-eminence, and you are the mighty ones in the land (of Egypt). Yet who would vindicate us from the violence of Allah if it comes upon us?” Pharaoh said, “I show you only what I see and guide you to the way of rectitude.”
    30. Then he who had believed in Allah said, “O people, I fear the probability of a misfortune which might befall you one day. The day like that of those who confederated against their messengers, 
    31. Like the manner of the people of Nuh (Noah), and those of `Ad, Thamud, and those who succeeded them; yet Allah means no injustice to His bondmen.” 
    32. “O people,” he added, “I fear for you the Day of interchange (of thoughts and words). 
    33. The Day when you will turn your backs and try to flee in vain, for you have no guardian to you from Allah. And he whom Allah does not guide to His Way of righteousness will find no one to guide him thereto.
    34. “And (before Musa [Moses] came) Yusuf (Joseph), who was sent to you with clear evidence (of Allah’s omnipotence and authority), but you remained in a state of doubt as to the truth and reality of what he presented to you. And when he perished, you claimed that Allah would never send another messenger after him. Thus does Allah lead into error him who is extravagant and suspicious (of the truth).”
    35. Those who dispute concerning the signs of Allah without an authority that has come to them, cause Allah’s strong detest as well as the strong repugnance of those who have believed. Such objectionable disposition Allah imprints on the heart of every proud tyrant.
    36. And Pharaoh said, “O Haman, build for me a tower; I may find the means,
    37. the means of getting to Heaven’s realm where I may meet and converse with Musa’s God, as I think that he is indeed a liar.” And thus Pharaoh was enticed by his odious deeds and was swayed from the way of righteousness. The plotting devised by Pharaoh attained no end but detriment.
    38. Then the believer of Pharaoh’s household said, “O people, follow me, I will lead you to the path of rectitude.”
    39. “O people,” he added, “life here is but a brief and ephemeral enjoyment that ends quickly; whereas the Hereafter is, indeed, the settled eternal Residence.”
    40. He who does an odious deed will not be recompensed but with the like thereof, and he whose deeds are imprinted with wisdom and piety whether male or female will be welcomed into gardens of bliss wherein they are provided for without reckoning.
    41. “O people,” he said, “how is it that I call you to the deliverance (from sin and the admission to eternal bliss), and you invite me to the fire of Hell? 
    42. In effect, you call me to disbelieve in Allah and to associate with Him other deities whom I do not know; whereas I invite you to The All-Mighty and The Oft-Forgiving.
    43. “Indeed, the object of worship you call me to reverence and make obeisance to has no assertion of any right here or hereafter, and our return will be to Allah. And the extravagant, not the righteous believers, are the inhabitants of the fire of Hell.
    44. “One day you will remember the truthfulness of all that I have expressed to you in words, and as for me, I confide my command to Allah. Allah is The Ever-Beholding of (His) bondmen.”
    45. In consequence, Allah ensured him immunity from the evil consequences of their cunning and their scheming; whereas these people headed by Pharaoh were beset on all sides with odious torment. 
    46. They will be exposed to the fire, morning and evening. And on the Day of Judgment the command is issued thus: “Make the house of Fir`awn to enter the severest torment.”
    47. Tell them, Muhammad, that there and then will all the inmates of Hell argue among themselves. And the weak will say to those who were proud, the leaders, “We were your followers in life below. Are you now going to carry on our behalf a share of the Fire?”
    48. And there those who were proud will say, “We are now all within it. Allah has already judged between His bondmen (and each of us has his own share of punishment).”
    49. And there those of the weak and arrogant in Hell will implore the keepers who keep guard, “Would you invoke Allah your Lord to lighten for us torture just for one day!”
    50. The keepers will say, rebuking them, “Did your messengers not present to you clear evidences demonstrating Allah’s omnipotence?” “Indeed, they did,” they will say. Then the keepers will say, “You may invoke Allah as long as you want; the invocations of the disbelievers are in error (as they attain no end).”
    51. Indeed, We will give victory to Our messengers and to those who have believed, both here (by taking revenge against their enemies and attesting to their disbelief), and on the Day of Judgment when the witnesses will testify (that the messengers conveyed the message and that the disbelievers denied it). 
    52. The day when no excuses will profit the unjust. They have come within the measure of Allah’s curse, and the worst of it is their odious residence (and their heritage in Hell).
    53. We sent to Musa (Moses) the guidance and We made the Children of Isra'il the inheritors of the Book,
    54. As a guidance to all truth and an admonition apprehended by those endowed with intellects. 
    55. Therefore, be patient, Muhammad (and put up with their harm). The promise of Allah, your Lord, to give victory to you and the believers is the truth. Invoke Allah’s forgiveness for your sin, and praise Allah your Lord in acknowledgement of His divine favors, and extol His glorious attributes evening and morning.
    56. Those who dispute against Allah’s signs without any authority coming to them, simply vent their pride and inordinate self-esteem but attaining no end. Therefore, seek refuge, Muhammad, with Allah. He is All-Hearing and All-Seeing.
    57. In effect, the creation of the heavens and the earth is a greater work than the creation of mankind, but most people do not know (hence, they deny resurrection despite their acknowledgement of His creation of the heavens and the earth).
    58. Nor does the blind man equal the one who sees; nor do those who believed and imprinted their deeds with righteousness compare with odious works. How little do you people remember!
    59. As to the Hour of Judgment, it will unquestionably come to pass, there is no suspicion about that but most people do not believe.
    60. “Invoke Me,” says Allah your Lord. “I respond to your invocation. Meanwhile, those who are too proud to worshipping Me, will enter Hell utterly abject.” 
    61. Allah is He Who made for you the night to take your natural rest, and the day to see (and accomplish your activities). Indeed, Allah’s efficacious grace abounds in mankind, but most mankind do not thank (Him).
    62. This is Allah your Lord, The Creator of all things. There is no god but Him. Then to whom besides Him would you diverged?  
    63. Thus in like manner were diverged those who came before you, who refused to acknowledge Our Signs. 
    64. Allah alone is He Who set for you the earth in the order of a settled habitation (where you establish your abode) and made the heaven a construction (of imposing magnitude). He gave you form and He fashion you—and how shapely He fashioned you! And He provided you with various good and wholesome kinds of provisions. This is Allah your Lord. Blessed be He and praise be to Him, Lord of the worlds.
    65. He is The Living One; there is no god but Him. Therefore, invoke Him (paying reverence), devoting your religious observance faithfully to Him. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.
    66. Say to them, Muhammad, “I have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke apart from Allah ever since evidences came to me from my Lord. And there I have been commanded to surrender to Lord of the worlds.”
    67. It is He Who created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, then from a clot clinging organism, then He bring you out as a newborn baby. Then you grow to maturity of power, then you are carried to be old. And among you is he who encounters death earlier. He created you in such a manner that you may live on to a predetermined age that you may consider.
    68. It is He Who gives life, and He causes death, and when He determines a Command, He simply says “Be” and it is.
    69. Have you not seen, Muhammad, those who dispute (with opposing arguments) against Allah’s signs, how they are turned away (from the truth)?
    70. The one who cried lies to the Book, and to what We sent with Our Messengers will know.
    71. As the shackles are on their necks and the chains, they are pulled
    72. Into the scalding water, then they are seethed in the Fire,
    73. Then it is said to them, “Where are the ones you used to associate
    74. Apart from Allah?” They will say, “They have erred away.” And they add, “In effect, it is quite evident that we did not invoke anything before.” And thus Allah leads the disbelievers into error.
    75. They will be told, “This (train of evils you people drew after yourselves) is in requital of the exulting (you unjustly derived from nothing worthy of joy), and because of your excessive joy for any harm (that touches Allah’s messengers and bondmen). 
    76. Now enter into the gates of Hell, the kingdom of eternal suffering. Miserable is the lodging of the proud (ones).”
    77. Therefore, Muhammad, be patient. The promise of Allah is the absolute truth. We either show you (in your life time) some part of the punishment We have promised them, or in case you encounter death before it, then to Us they are destined to return (and We will requite them with what is commensurate with their deeds).
    78. Before you, Muhammad, We sent messengers to their people, some of whom We narrated to you their stories and some of whom We did not narrate to you their account. Nor was it ever for any Messenger to come up with a sign except with the permission of Allah. So when the Command of Allah comes to pass, here or hereafter, judgment is conducted in truth and justice. There and then, will the loss fall on the wrongdoers.
    79. Allah is He Who made for you cattle (camels, sheep and goats) to ride on, and (some) would serve as food.
    80. This is besides other benefits you derive and to effect what you desire in your breasts to attain, and upon their  backs and on board ships you (and your belongings) are carried.
    81. And other signs and revelations does He exhibit to you (displaying His omnipotence and authority). So which of the signs of Allah will you deny? 
    82. Have they not journeyed through the land and looked to see the end of those who preceded them, who were more in number and far mightier in power, and in their traces in the earth? Yet, what they earned did not avail them.
    83. And when their messengers brought them the clear and plain evidences, they exulted with what they had of worldly knowledge. What they used to mock at redounded on them.
    84. And when these nations encountered and experienced Our Violence, they said, “We believe in Allah alone, and we disbelieve in what we associated with Him.”
    85. But their belief in Allah (and their acknowledgment of His Godhead) when they saw Our violence befalling them, the Enactment of Allah which has passed on His bondmen. And there the disbelievers lost.


