SURAH 41
FUSSILAT
Expounded Revelations
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with two letters of the Arabic alphabet, as do other surahs. This surah assures mankind of the high noble status of the Qur’an and of the glad tidings and the warning it contains. It explains the stance of the disbelievers toward it, how they rejected and fought it, the Prophet’s stance toward the disbelievers and his adherence to his message, proclaiming to them, “I am only a human like you. Nonetheless, I am being told by Heaven that Allah, your Lord, is the One and Only God; stand firm on His Path and invoke His forgiveness.” 
    Then the surah reminds the disbelievers of the signs that attest to Allah’s omnipotence in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and cautions them of the end that afflicted the nearest nations to them, `Ad and Thamud. It reminds them of the Last Day, the Day when their senses—ears, eyes and hearts—will bear witness to their deeds of iniquity, and a dispute will take place between them and their organs. And those who denied their Creator will say, “Allah our Lord, would You show us those of the jinn and mankind who misled us and made us wander from the path of righteousness so that we may trample them, spurn them, treat them contemptuously, and reject them disdainfully.” And according to Allah’s Way in this Book, the Qur’an—that He mentions the believers whenever He mentions the disbelievers—the surah speaks about those who said “Allah is our Lord Whom alone we worship” and have always trodden the path of righteousness. And it mentions the heavenly blessings prepared for them, and, finally, contrasts evil and good, stressing that “never does a deed crowned with equity and good compare with a deed tinted with evil and ill-will.”
    Then the surah draws the attention to the signs of Allah’s omnipotence that prove the truth of resurrection. It returns to vehemently repudiating those who corrupt Allah’s revelations and distort them from their intended purpose and meaning. It stresses that they are not hidden from Allah, nor is their motive unknown to Him, and that this Book is not open to any aspect of falsehood, past, present, or future. It is a disclosure of knowledge, wisdom, and guidance authoritatively revealed by Him Who is All-Wise and Worthy of all praise. Muhammad’s message is in full harmony with, and not different from, the messages sent before him.
    The surah then stresses a trait of mankind, which is that when Allah mercifully brings him into His grace, he feels impelled to move away from the truth, and when a misfortune or calamity befalls him, he invokes Allah’s mercy and blessings.
    The surah ends with stressing its two most important ideas: First, it assures mankind of the high noble status of the Qur’an, which occasions no doubt and represents the truth. Second, the motive that led the disbelievers to deny Allah and go astray was their doubt in the resurrection.
 
    1. H (ha). M (mim). The surah starts with these letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an.
    2. This Book (the Qur’an) is a revelation from Allah, Who bestowed unlimited favors on His creation.  
    3. A Book whose words, syllables, and meanings have been expounded (and made plain, and which distinguishes between good and bad, giving glad tidings and warning, giving examples, and clarifying the orders [of Allah]). A Qur’an in Arabic to a people who know.
    4. A Book announcing to the diligent believers blissful tidings of the blessings made ready for them, and warning against disobeying Allah and disregarding the profound reverence due to Him. Yet most of them turn away, so they do not hear. 
    5. And they (the disbelievers) say to the Messenger, “Our hearts, Muhammad, are shielded against what you call us to, and our ears are deaf, and, in fact, you might say there is a screen between us and you. So you just proceed as you have begun, we are doing what we will.”
    6. Say to them, Messenger, “I am only a mortal like you. Nonetheless, it is revealed to me that Allah your Lord is One and only One. Go straight to Him and invoke His forgiveness. Woe to the associators,
    7. Who do not give the Zakah (poor-due) and are disbelievers in the Hereafter.”
    8. But the believers who do righteous deeds will rejoice at the unceasing blissful reward.
    9. Say to the disbelievers, “In effect you do disbelieve in Allah, Who created the earth in two days; yet, you associate with Him other compeers when He is Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”
    10. And He placed on it anchorages [mountains] (for stabilization); and He blessed it with His divine favor and He determined its livelihood in four days. He ordained a fixed estimation for everything as a sign of His omnipotence for those who question.
    11. Then He leveled himself to the heaven in its smoky state. Then He said to the heaven and to the earth “Come within My authority willingly or unwillingly.” Both respond, “We both come driven with unconditional obedience to Allah’s Command.”			
    12. Then He decreed them as seven heavens in two days and revealed to each heaven its destined Command. And We decorated the lowermost heaven with lamps to keep guard (against devils from listening to the heavenly news), a plan determined by The All-Mighty and The All-Knowing.
    13. Should they, the disbelievers, turn away (and turn a deaf ear), then say to them, “I warn you of an injurious tempest like the thunderbolt that overtook the people of `Ad and of Thamud.”
    14. It overtook them when their messengers came to them, from before them and from behind them, advising them to worship no one but Allah. But they (turned a deaf ear and) said, “Had Allah our Lord willed us to discern divine truths, He would have sent angels. Therefore, we are disbelievers in what you have been sent with.”
    15. As for `Ad, they were unjustly proud. They, with inordinate self-esteem insolently, said, “Who is greater than us in power?” Do they say that and not see that Allah Who created them is infinitely greater in power and far mightier than they are? And they continued to repudiate Our Signs.
    16. And so, on some unlucky and miserable days, We drove against them a fiercely cold wind so that they tasted the torment of disgrace and multiple humiliations in life. And the suffering of the Hereafter will be more disgraceful, and no one then can be vindicated.  
    17. But as for the Thamud, We guided them to the Way of righteousness (and that of evil), but they preferred blindness to guidance, and so they were seized by a thunderbolt stunning them with torment and humiliation in requital of their deeds of iniquity.
    18. And We saved those who believed and were pious (to Allah).
    19. And mention to them, Prophet, the day on which Allah’s enemies are mustered in throngs toward Hell. Then those in the foremost lines are stopped until those in the rear catch up.
    20. And when they all reach it (Fire) and are asked about the sins they committed in life below (they deny). There and then, their senses—hearing, sight, and their skins—bear witness to their deeds of iniquity.
    21. They will say to their skins, “Why do you testify against us?” But their skins will proclaim, “Allah has re-created us, like everything else, invested with articulate sound, and He created you in the beginning from nothingness and back to Him alone you return (that He may requite you with what is commensurate with your deeds).” 
    22. But you could not hide your hideous deeds from the notice of your hearing or your sight or your skins lest they should bear witness against your deeds of iniquity. The fact is you did not think that Allah knows much of what you do.
    23. Such invalid surmise as you have formed of Allah your Lord brought great and irretrievable disaster upon you and you have come to be great losers (on the Day of Judgment).
    24. And now if they prefer, Muhammad, to sit patiently, nonetheless, they are destined to the eternal lodging in the Fire. If they invoke Allah’s amends and forgiveness, never will Heaven respond favorably to their amends.
    25. And We have bound them to satanic companions [in this world] who gave them evil counsel and allured them to a brighter present and a happier destiny (by denying resurrection and requital). What was predicted beforehand has come to be, that they—like others among the jinn and mankind of past generations (who preferred evil to good)—all were born to be great losers.
    26. And the disbelievers said to each other, “Do not listen to this Qur’an, and when it is recited, talk idly about it; perhaps, by so doing, you will overcome (Muhammad).”
    27. We will make the disbelievers taste a severe torment, and We will requite them for every deed the worst of what they did.
    28. This aforementioned recompense which Allah’s enemies will suffer in Hell, where they will find their eternal abode in requital of their repudiation of Allah’s signs and revelations.
    29. There and then will those who disbelieved in Allah say while in Hell, “Allah our Lord, would You show us those of the jinn and mankind who misguided us (and made us wander from the path of righteousness) so that we might trample over them, and reject them disdainfully.”
    30. Those who have proclaimed His oneness—“Our god is Allah, our Lord”—and they have always trodden the path of righteousness, the angels come down to give them the feeling of security and to announce to them “You are not to fear fate nor to grieve over predestined events; and rejoice at the blissful tidings of winning the Garden you were promised (by the prophets and messengers).”
    31. And the angels will say to them, “We are your patrons, who support you here, and your defenders and intercessors in the Hereafter, where you will find anything of any kind you desire and whatever you claim. 
    32. A hospitality and entertainment with honor and good will, conferred by Him Who is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.”
    33. And who has better words than he who urges the belief in Allah, His oneness and uniqueness, and does righteousness and proclaims, “I am one of the Muslims.”
    34. Nor does a fair deed compare with an odious deed. Therefore, repel what is distasteful and repugnant by what is morally fairer. And there you will find that he who harbors enmity and ill will toward you has come to be as though he were a constant patron.
    35. Nor can such a sublime disposition be granted except by those who exercise patience. Nor can such a disposition be attained except by those who are so fortunate (as to be divinely endowed with such a privilege).
    36. And if Satan entices you to turn away (from what Allah has commanded you), take refuge in Allah. Allah is, indeed, All-Hearer and All-Knower (Who can give you refuge from temptation).
    37. Among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Therefore, do not prostrate yourselves to the sun nor to the moon, but prostrate yourselves to Allah Who created the sun and the moon, and the night and the day, if you truly worship Him.
    38. Should the disbelievers continue to be unjustly proud. Nonetheless, those with Allah in His Heaven’s realm, that is, the angels, extol His glorious attributes night and day, and they never grow weary.*
    39. And among His signs is that you see the earth submissive standing so desolate and so bare, and when We send down the rain, it shakes and swells (by absorption of moisture) and begins the process of vegetal growth. Indeed, He Who gives it life from death will bring the dead back to life. He is, indeed, determiner over all things.
    40. Those who blaspheme Our Signs are not concealed from Us (and We will requite them accordingly). But then, is he who is cast into Fire better or he who comes back on the Day of Resurrection feeling secure? “You disbelievers, do whatever you decide on. He is indeed All-Seer of whatever you do.”
    41. Indeed, those who disbelieved in the Remembrance (the Qur’an), when it came to them, and surely it is a Mighty Book,
    42. A Book that is not open to falsehood, past, present, or future. It is a sending down of knowledge, wisdom, and guidance (authoritatively revealed by Him) Who is All-Wise and Worthy of all praise.


--------------------
* A prostration should be performed here.
    43. Nothing is said to you, Muhammad, except what was said to messengers sent before you. Indeed, Allah your Lord has mercy and forgiveness, and He has, also, painful punishment. (So He forgives him who repents to Him and inflicts punishment on those who are stubborn.)
    44. Had We made it a Qur’an that is foreign to their Arabic tongue, they would have said, “If only its signs were expounded (so that we could apprehend the intended sense)!” How is it that We render it in a form foreign to us (when it is addressed to an Arab)! Say to them, “It (the Qur’an) is to the believers an inherent heavenly power having a remedying effect to guide and counteract doubt (and redress uncertainties); whereas to those who disbelieve, it is an obstruction in their ears and to them it is blindness.” These are they who seem to be called upon from far away (they are also distant from Allah’s blessed abode).
    45. We gave Musa (Moses) the Book (the Tawrah) and it was met with disagreement. And had it not been for Allah’s word proclaimed beforehand, Muhammad, their differences would have been settled now. They are in doubt about it (the Qur’an) causing suspicions.
    46. He who does righteousness, it is for himself, and he who does odious deeds, then it is against himself. And never is Allah your Lord unjust to His servants.
    47. To Him alone is attributed the knowledge of the (predetermined and Eventful) Hour. And no fruits grow out of their sheaths, nor does a female (human or animal) conceive in her womb or give birth but He knows of it. And remember that there will come the Day when He, Allah, calls them (the disbelievers), “Where are those whom they associated with Him.” There and then, they will say, “We truly acknowledge that none of us can bear witness (to partners in deity).” 
    48. And there, they are renounced by those whom they used to invoke besides Allah. And now they realize that there is no evasion.
    49. Nonetheless, man does not weary of invoking Allah’s benefaction and charity in life below. But no sooner does a misfortune or evil touch him than he nurses despair and despondence.
    50. And if We should extend to man Our mercy and grace following the misfortune that touched him, he says, “This (meritorious outcome) is my pure right, and I do not think that the Eventful Hour will be coming up. And if I return back to Allah my Lord, there and then I will merit good.” In effect, there and then We will inform those who disbelieved in Allah of the detailed particulars of their deeds, and We will make them taste harsh torment.
    51. And when We mercifully favor man with Our grace, he veers away (and is more distant from what Allah inclines him to propound). And when a misfortune or evil touches him, he abounds in invoking Allah’s mercy and blessings.
    52. Say to the disbelievers, Muhammad, “What if it (the Qur’an) is a guide from Allah, and you disbelieve in it? Who, then, will have strayed far and erred and is in opposition?”
    53. We will soon show them Our Signs in the horizons of the universe and within themselves until it becomes evident to them that what you brought to them is the truth. (Have they denied Our clear revelations?) Is it not enough that Allah your Lord is a Witness over all things?
    54. Yet those disbelievers continue to wrangle about the meeting with Allah, their Lord. However, never doubt but it is He Who encompasses all things.


