SURAH 42
ASH-SHURA
Counsel
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah was revealed in Makkah. It was called Ash-Shura (Counsel) because it calls upon the believers to deal with their societies’ affairs on the basis of consultation, while implementing the truth and establishing justice. It also deals with many questions of religion and faith.
    It opens with emphasizing the divine nature of the Qur’an, stressing that it is a revelation from Allah, and refuting the disbelievers’ allegations. It gives special attention to comforting the Prophet, then moves to emphasizing the omnipotence of Allah, Who revealed the Qur’an and accorded it the highest position and noblest status. It states that some people denied it, despite the clear and unquestionable evidence that proves that it is Allah’s revelation. Then the surah emphasizes Allah’s power and absolute authority to do whatever He wills, and stresses that this message and all the preceding ones are basically the same. The messages all declared the oneness of Allah, and they all demanded that people submit themselves to Allah alone and conform to Islam. All the messages made clear the fatal consequences of denying Allah or associating with Him other objects of worship. It condemns associating other deities with Allah and being at variance regarding the truth. It also condemns the disbelievers’ wish that the Final Hour be hastened on. 
    Then it directs to the best way of calling people to the way of religion, emphasizes how benevolent Allah is to His servants, and warns of abandoning oneself to mundane things. Then it contrasts the miserable status of the disbelievers and the magnificent status of the believers in the Hereafter, and refutes the disbelievers’ claim that the Prophet forged the Qur’an although they failed to produce a surah similar to even the shortest surah of the Qur’an. It stresses that Allah accepts repentance of the believers and explains the rationale behind apportioning livelihood among people, for Allah provisions some abundantly and gives to others with measure.
    The surah also shows the blessings of the rain and Allah’s omnipotence and authority, and shows that the disasters that afflict people are only caused by their sins. Then Allah repeats in other words the magnificent status of the believers in the Hereafter, and the miserable status of the disbelievers in the Hereafter. Then the surah calls upon people to act swiftly in accepting Allah’s call before they are taken by death. The surah gives special attention to comforting the Prophet and emphasizes that it is Allah Who bestows on whom He wills male or female offspring or none. Then it mentions the ways Allah addresses His prophets, and ends with defining the path of righteousness the people should follow.
 
   1. H (ha). M (mim). 
   2. `A (`ayn). S (sin). Q (qaf). 
   (The surah starts with these letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.)
   3. In like manner does Allah reveals to you, Muhammad, even as He revealed to those sent before you, (His veritable revelations). Thus says Allah, The All-Mighty and The All-Wise.
   4. Allah, Who owns all that is in the heavens and on earth; supremacy, authority, and power over them are acknowledged as His own. He is Ever-Exalted, Ever-Magnificent. 
   5. The heavens almost rend for the profound reverence from above due to Him in His Heaven’s realm. And the angels extol the praise of their Lord and invoke His forgiveness for those living on earth. Indeed, it is He, Allah, Who is The Oft-Forgiving and The Ever-Merciful.
   6. And those who take others patrons apart from Allah, He will keep them in view. (He watches over innocence and folly.) You, Muhammad, are not entrusted to their care.
   7. Thus did We reveal to you, Muhammad, a Qur’an in the Arabic literary form to warn (the people of) the Mother of Cities (Makkah) and (the people of) all cities around. To warn of the Day of Gathering, wherein there is no suspicion when a group will be in the beautiful and blissful Garden of Heaven’s realm and a group in the blazes.
   8. Had Allah willed, He would have made them one nation (united in feeling and in thought), but He extends His mercy to whom He wills (that is, to those whom He knows beforehand will prefer guidance to wrongdoing). Whereas the unjust wrongdoers have no patron or guardian, nor can anyone offer them help or vindicate them from Allah’s punishment.
   9. Those wrongdoers have taken patrons apart from Him. (This is not up to them,) but Allah is He under Whose patronage comes safety and security, and He is it Who resurrects the dead, and He is The Determiner to do all things.
   10. And whatever subject or point (that is, faith or disbelief) you differ about, refer it to Allah, The Ultimate Authority, for decision, saying, “He is Allah my Lord, in Whom I trust and to Whom I have recourse for penitence and guidance.”
   11. He is Allah, The Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who provided you with males and females of your kind, and provided you with cattle and made of their kind males and females as well, so that you procreate and increase in number (by natural generation). Nothing material or immaterial is like unto Him; He is All-Hearer and He is All-Seer.
   
   12. To Him belongs the prerogative authority and control over all that exists in the heavens and on the earth. He outspreads livelihood to whom He wills and He also gives by measure to whom He wills. He is indeed All-Knower of all things.
   13. To you He has legislated the same system of faith He enjoined to Nuh (Noah), the system of faith which We revealed to you, Muhammad. The same system We enjoined to Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa (Moses), and `Isa (Jesus) that all of you establish the precepts and bases of religion (by following and adhering to its teachings) and never be at variance about it. The associators find it hard to accept what you call them to follow. But Allah selects for His message whom He wills and leads to His path of righteousness those who have recourse to Providence in penitence.
   14. Yet the previous messengers’ followers only became divided into sects and factions after knowledge had come to them being inequitable among themselves. And had it not been for Allah’s Word proclaimed beforehand (to postpone punishment to a determined point of time), their hereafter would have been decreed now. And now, the successors who have inherited the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]), are in doubt causing suspicion.
   15. For the sake of unity of religion call (mankind) to Allah and go straight as you have been commanded and do not follow their prejudices. And say to them, “I believe in all the Books Allah has sent down to His messengers, and I have been commanded to administer right and justice between you.” And say to them, “Allah is our Lord and your Lord. We are accountable for our deeds and you are answerable for yours. No argument does either of us advance against the other (nor is there between us a contest of emulation). Allah will bring us together. To Him is the Destiny.”
   16. As to those who argue concerning Allah after He has been responded to, their argument is rebutted before their Lord, and they have come within the measure of Allah’s anger, and painful will be their torment.
   17. Allah is He Who has sent down the Book [the Qur’an] (and the Books sent before). He sent them in conformity with truth and in agreement with reality and with the balance of justice. And what makes you know that the predetermined Hour may well be drawing near?
   18. Those who do not believe seek to hasten it. But those who believe are timorous about it, and know it is the Truth. Indeed, those who wrangle with opposing argument against the predetermined Hour, denying that it will come to pass, are lost in the maze of error.
   19. Allah is Benevolent and the Kind Sovereign to His servants; He provides livelihood and He fits out whom He wills with what He wills, and He is All-Strong, and All-Mighty.
   20. He who chooses the tillage of the Hereafter with wisdom and piety, We will reward with what is greater than what corresponds to his piety. And he who chooses the tillage of the world, We will provide with what is apportioned to him here, but he will be denied any assignment in the Hereafter.
   
   21. Or do they have associates who legislated for them a particular system of faith and worship other than what Allah has given permission? (Never!) And had it not been for His word proclaimed beforehand (to postpone the final decision to a determined point of time), Allah would have decided and judged between the believers and the disbelievers (in this life). But the unjust wrongdoers will suffer a painful torment.
   22. There and then you will see those who unjustly wronged themselves being timorous with the sudden fear and the apprehension of danger, which will certainly befall them. Whereas you will see those who had believed and done righteous deeds beyond a common joy in the beatitude of Heaven’s meadows, where they will find anything they like with their Lord. This is, indeed, the great bounty and Grace of Providence.
   23. This great favor is the happy tidings Allah proclaims to His bondmen who believe and do righteous deeds. Say to them, Muhammad, “I do not ask you for anything as a reward except the affection for kinship and good disposition toward Allah and His Messenger (so that you get nearer to Him and win His grace and mercy). And whoever crowns a deed with fairness, Allah will double the fair reward for him. Allah is, indeed, Oft-Forgiving, Worthy of Thanks and most ready to appreciate the deeds of those who are obedient to Him.”
   24. Or do the disbelievers say, “He (Muhammad) has attributed to Allah what he has fabricated a lie.” But if it be His will, He will seal your heart. Indeed, Allah effaces and blots out falsehood and establishes the truth, (that is, Islam) by His words (that He revealed to you). He is All-Knower of all private thoughts and feelings in the breasts.
   25. It is He Who accepts those of His bondmen who humbly repent and forgives their odious deeds, and He is All-Knowing of all that you do.
   26. He grants the prayer of those who believe and do righteous deeds. Moreover, He gives increase of His Grace (more than they request). But the disbelievers will be put to the severe torment.
   27. If Allah were to outspread His provision to His bondmen, they would be inequitable on earth and transgress the limits. But He sends down livelihood generously to whom He wills, and gives with measure to whom He wills; He is Well-Aware and All-Seer of His bondmen.
   28. It is He Who sends down the rain to revive the land and causes it to bear crops after people have been despondent (with hunger and drought and have nursed despair). He extends His mercy and spreads the blessings of the rain. He is the Patronizer; it is He Who is the Ever-Praiseworthy.
   29. Among the signs is His creation of the heavens and the earth and the beings He disseminated in them. He is The Determiner to gather them (for requital) when He wills.
   30. And whatever misfortune or affliction befalls you is a consequence of what your hands have earned. Yet He is Clement to you a great deal.
   31. Nor will you be able to defy Allah’s punishment here on earth. And besides Allah, no one can confer patronage on you if He afflicts you, nor can anyone offer you vindication.
   32. And among His signs are the stately sea-going vessels (gracefully imposing) like mountains.
   33. If He willed, He would take the wind out of the sails, and they would remain motionless on its surface. These are tokens, indeed, showing Allah’s omnipotence and authority; signs giving insight to the patient and the thankful.
   34. Or if He willed, He would wreck them with a fierce wind in requital of their earnings. And He is Clement towards much. 
   35. A fact to be apprehended by the ones who dispute about Our Signs, that there is no evasion (nor can they go unpunished).
   36.) Do not be conceited because of mundane things.) All that you have been given is simply (the evanescent and fleeting) enjoyments of life here. Whereas all that is in the Providence of Allah is more charitable and more enduring for those who believe and who trust in Allah, their Lord.
   37. And those who avoid major sins and obscenities, and when angered they forgive (and do not entertain the thoughts of ill will).
   38. Who respond favorably to Allah their Lord. They keep up prayer. They conduct their affairs and ordinary pursuits of life by taking counsel together to establish justice and integrity. They spend in benevolence and in equity of what We provided them (of Our bounty).
   39. Who (vindicate themselves and) set right and redress a grievance or an abuse, when afflicted with inequity.
   40. The return of an odious deed is an odious deed of like nature, but he who is clement and acts righteously, Allah will give him his reward. He does not love the unjust.
   41. Yet he who vindicates himself after an injustice has been inflicted upon him incurs no consequence or way for blame. 
   42. But the consequence is, indeed, incurred on the transgressors who unjustly wrong people and treat them inequitably on earth, going beyond prudent and truthful limits. Such persons will be put to painful torment.
   43. But again, he who bears the wrongs patiently and forgives, this is, indeed, the mode of considering matters with strong resolve.
   44. And he whom Allah does not guide to His path of righteousness, for his error, will find no patron besides Him to guide him to it. And you will see the unjust wrongdoers excited with fear and terror when torment is in their sight. There and then they will say, “O Allah, do we stand a chance to return back to life (and hold Your way and follow it without deviation)?”
   45. And you will see them exposed to the Fire, submissive in humiliation, glancing with furtive eyes. And there the believers will say, “Losers, indeed, are those who lost themselves (in vanity for opting for disbelief), and lost them their families and relatives on the Day of Resurrection.” (Allah draws attention to the fact that) the unjust wrongdoers have brought perpetual torment on themselves.
   46. And no patrons from those they worshiped apart from Allah or those they followed in disobeying Allah will vindicate them from Allah’s punishment. And he whom Allah leads into error will, indeed, lose the way to righteousness.
   47. Respond favorably to (Allah) your Lord before a Day comes when Allah will never reverse the Hereafter (to the here below). Nor will you find a shelter, nor can you deny what is true.
   48. And if they should veer away (nonetheless, do not abandon yourself to grief). We did not send you, Muhammad, a preserver to watch over their innocence and folly. You are only responsible for proclaiming to them Our message (and you did). Yet if We extend Our mercy to mankind and make them taste Our benediction, they exult with it. And if an odious misfortune befalls them in consequence of what their hands forwarded, man wonders how and why and becomes a disbeliever.
   49. To Allah belongs the Kingdom and the sovereign authority of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He bestows female offspring on whom He wills and He bestows male offspring on whom He wills.
   50. He bestows a combination of both male and female and renders barren whom He wills. He is, indeed, All-Knower and Determiner over all things.
   51. No mortal would qualify to be spoken to directly by Allah. But (Allah communicates to man) only by revelation, or from behind a veil (without man seeing Who speaks to him), or He sends a Messenger, who would reveal, with His permission, what Allah has ordained and what He wills. He is, indeed, Most High and He is All-Wise.
   52. Likewise (as We revealed to the messengers before you), did We reveal to you, Muhammad, the Qur’an, Spirit of Our Command. You neither knew what the Book (the Qur’an) was nor what belief was like. But We made it (the Qur’an) a light with which We impart knowledge to guide to all truth whom We will of Our servants. You, Muhammad, indeed, guide to the path of righteousness.
   53. The path of Allah, to Whom belong all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. (Supremacy, authority, and power over them are acknowledged as His own.) The Ultimate Authority is destined to Him. 
