SURAH 43
AZ-ZUKHRUF
Adornment
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with two letters of the Arabic alphabet. Then it displays the esteem of the Qur’an as it really is, as well as the view held by the opponents of faith. The surah also makes evident that there is only One God Who is Worthy of being revered. Yet the opponents of faith associated other objects of worship with Him and they assigned to Him daughters and to themselves sons. However, when they failed to defend the great argument of their folly, they reverted to the faith of their ancestors. 
    The surah narrates accounts of Ibrahim (Abraham) and depicts how the Makkan disbelievers wondered at the revelation of the Qur’an to Muhammad and not to a distinguished man of the two towns, that is, Makkah and Ta’if, as if they were apportioning Allah’s bounties; whereas it is Allah Who has apportioned their livelihood among them here due to their inability to do it. Then the surah stresses that were it not that all people would unite in feeling and disbelief in Allah, Allah would provide the homes of those who deny Him with all sorts of adornments, all of which are simply ephemeral enjoyments of this life. It also shows that if anyone turns his back to the truth, Allah will bind him to a devil who will lead him to perdition. Then it recounts the story of Musa (Moses) and Pharaoh and depicts how Pharaoh was deceived by his kingdom, which incurred Allah’s wrath on him and his people. Then it mentions `Isa (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary), on whom Allah conferred His grace in requital of his endeavor to call to Allah’s path of righteousness. Afterward it warns the wrongdoers of Allah’s punishment and gives to the believers the glad tidings of Paradise, where they will find anything that they desire. The surah ends with stressing that everything in the universe belongs to Allah alone and that the gods associated with Allah are incapable of anything. So leave them alone, Muhammad, and decline to recognize them, but address them with the customary formula of salutation “peace.” Then they will come to know the fatal consequence of their obsession with follies.

    1. H (ha). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet, as do many other surahs.
    2. Allah has given a solemn declaration by the evident Book.
    3. We have made it in Arabic literary form that you may consider its inimitability.
    4. This Qur’an reflects the grandeur of the preserved Book exalted and wise (as held by Us in high esteem).
    5. Or do you people think that We would disregard you just because you have been extravagant? (No, that will never be.)
    6. How many a Prophet did We send to those far back in the distant past?
    7. Nonetheless, no Prophet do We send to guide people to all truth but they mock him.
    8. We caused to perish in the distant past nations who were far mightier and more valiant in assault than the disbelievers of Makkah, and We destroyed them. And so the fateful events of those of the past have passed away (so take heed, you disbelievers).
    9. If you should ask the disbelievers, Muhammad, “Who has created the heavens and the earth?” they will say, “They were created by Him, The All-Mighty and The All-Knower.”
    10. Who has created the earth for you and made it a cradle and a settled habitation so that you can inhabit it and benefit from it, and He channeled it with tracks, ways, and waterways guiding (your direction in your travel and movement).
    11. Who sends from the heaven enough rainwater in due measure and with it a dead and barren land is revived. Similarly, you will be brought out and resurrected (so how can you deny Him?)	
    12. Who created all pairs of the opposite sex and all creatures and made ships for you and beasts as means of transportation, which you ride.
    13. That you may sit and rest comfortably upon their backs and render solemn acknowledgement of divine favors of your Lord when traveling by land or sea. And say, “All Extolment be to Him Who has subjected (these animate and inanimate creatures to us); it would be impossible to associate comrades to Him.
    14. “And indeed to Allah our Lord we will all ultimately go back.”
    15. Yet they (the disbelievers) have related to Him some of His servants as His sons and considered them His partners in worship; indeed, man is ungrateful and evident disbeliever.
    16. Or do you claim that He adopted from among His creatures the female and elected to you people the male? 
    17. They related this to Him, yet ironically, the moment that any of them hears the glad tidings of the birth of his female child—the sex, which he ascribes to Allah, The All-Merciful—his countenance at once blackens, and he falls into the darkness of deepest anguish.
    18. Is it befitting to ascribe to Allah a creature who is born and raised surrounded by ornaments and fails to defend an argument with adversaries?
    19. And they chose female designations to name the angels who are servants of Allah, The All-Merciful! Did they witness their creation (and by consequence came to this conclusion)? We will write their irresponsible testimony and call them to account.
    20. And the disbelievers allege, “Had Allah, The All-Merciful, so willed, we would never have worshiped these deities.” They have no knowledge of the truth nor do they have information or proof to support their allegation; they simply conjecture.
    21. Did We bring them a Book beforehand authorizing their allegation so they are upholding it fast?
    22. In effect, they (projected their own cause so as to) say, “We found our fathers bent on a particular way of faith and worship, and we are guided upon their track.”
    23. Likewise, We never sent any warner before you, Muhammad, to any town but that its luxurious said, “We found our fathers bent on a particular way of faith and worship and we emulate their tracks.”
    24. The warner said to them, “Do you follow your fathers even if I present you with what is more guiding than what you found your fathers bent on?” Yet (they denied the religion) saying, “We do not believe in what you have been sent with.”
    25. In consequence We took just vengeance on them in this life; and there you can see what was the end of those who cried lies to the truth.
    26. (Tell them, Muhammad, the narrative of Ibrahim [Abraham]) when he said to his father and his people, “I am quit of your ills and of all those you worship.
    27. “I worship Him who originated me and caused my existence; He will, indeed, guide me to all truth.”
    28. A Word he founded and he passed on to his posterity and to those who would succeed him (the dogma of Allah’s Oneness), that they may turn back (to Him).
    29. (But the idolaters ignored Ibrahim’s great legacy.) Yet I made them and you people and their fathers enjoy life until the Qur’an has come to them to call them to the truth at the hands of an evident and esteemed Messenger.
    30. And when the Qur’an was presented with the truth guiding them to all truth, they described it as sheer sorcery, and said, “we are disbelievers in it.”
    31. And the idolators insolently deny the revelation of the Qur’an to Muhammad, saying, “If only this Qur’an (which he claims that Allah revealed) were sent down to a distinguished man from one of the two cities (of Makkah and Ta’if)!”
    32. Is it they who divide the mercy of your Lord? We divided between them their livelihood in this world. We promoted and exalted in rank some above others and arranged them in grades so that they render subjection to one another (and minister to the comfort of each other). But to be a recipient of the mercy and efficacious grace of Allah, your Lord, outweighs all that they may gather or treasure up in life.
    33. Were it not that mankind would be one nation, We have provided the homes of those who disbelieve in Allah, The All-Merciful, with ceilings and roofs of silver as well as stairs of silver by which to ascend.
    34. And homes sparkling with silver doors and lounges of silver on which they recline and rest. 
    35. We would provide them with all sorts of adornments, whereas Allah, your Lord, has reserved the beatitude of the Hereafter for those who are pious. 
    36. But he who is purblind to the Qur’an, which was revealed by Allah, The All-Merciful, We will preordain to a satan (devil) who will follow him as a comrade.
    37. Such companionship of evil ones fitted to destruction will bar them from the Way (of The All-Merciful) and they think they are guided to all truth.
    38. Until the Day comes and he comes to Allah’s august presence. He will then say to that evil comrade, “I wish I had kept my distance and were as distant from you as the two easts are from each other; how evil you were for a comrade.”
    39. But on this Day they are told, “You have unjustly wronged yourselves and now you are partners in the torment.”
    40. But do you think, Muhammad, you will be able to make the deaf hear, or that you can guide such persons as have justly been destined to evident error (and strayed from the way of righteousness)? 
    41. Therefore, Muhammad, if We take you away (or let you witness the promised punishment), rest assured that We will take just vengeance on them (in this life and in the Hereafter).
    42. Or if We do not take you away, then We will show you the punishment that We promised; indeed, We are the Avengers against them.
    43. (And this will certainly take place;) therefore, keep your hold on the Qur’an that has been revealed to you, Muhammad. You are, indeed, on a straight Path.
    44. For the Qur’an is a Reminder to you and your people (for it has been revealed in Arabic), and there will come the Day when all of you will be called to account.
    45. And ask the Messengers We sent before you, “Did We make, apart from The All-Merciful, gods to be worshipped?”
    46. We sent Musa (Moses) to Pharaoh and his chiefs (with miracles attesting to his truthfulness), and there he said to them, “I am the Messenger of Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    47. But when he came to them with Our signs, they laughed at them.
    48. And every sign We showed them was greater than its sister-sign. And when they insisted on transgressing, We took them with torment so that they might turn to Us.
    49. They said to Musa, “O you who are knowledgeable in magic, invoke Allah your Lord and appeal to Him, in virtue of what He covenanted with you (to deliver us from this burdensome affliction), and We will be guided into all truth.”
    50. And when We lifted off the torment from them, they simply broke their vow.
    51. Then Pharaoh called upon their people: “Am I not,” he said, “the sovereign of Egypt, and these rivers flow beneath me! Can you people not see how powerful I am (and how weak Musa is)?”  
    52. “Am I not,” he added, exaggerating, “far better in worldly conditions than this creature, who is contemptible (and can hardly express himself) or evidently put his thoughts into words!”
    53. He also urged them to disbelieve Musa saying, “If only a bracelet of gold from Heaven’s realm or he had been accompanied by angels in comradeship!”
    54. Thus did Pharaoh induce levity on his people, who soon obeyed him. They were a mischievous people disposed to immorality.
    55. And when they were really enough to provoke Our anger (they came within the measure of Our wrath and) We took vengeance on them and drowned them all.
    56. And We made of Pharaoh and his people (with this vindictive punishment and fateful event), a similitude that served as a warning to later generations.
    57. And when `Isa (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary) was cited as an example for being as Adam (whom Allah created from dust by His word “Be” and it was, tha is, a servant of Allah on whom Allah conferred prophethood and, thus, not befitted to be worshiped besides Allah) your people clamored, and (refused to recognize him and) laughed him to scorn.
    58. The disbelievers said, “Are our gods better or `Isa?” They did not give such an example but to dispute and contend. They are an adversary people given to contention.
    59. `Isa, is only a servant of Ours on whom We bestowed the favor of prophethood, and We made him an example to the Children of Isra'il (of Our omnipotence and authority).
    60. Had We willed, We would have made some of you angels (or created angels who would live on earth and succeed you). 
    61. Being born to no father (and being able to restore the sight of the man who is congenitally blind and to heal the leper) will be the sign of impending judgment and that the Final Hour is, indeed, imminent. Therefore, do not wrangle about the event, and follow (My Messenger who guides you to) My straight Path.
    62. And do not let Satan bar you away from My path of righteousness; he is your evident enemy.
    63. And when Allah sent `Isa (who presented the Children of Isra'il with clear evidence of Allah’s omnipotence and authority), he said to them, “Now I have come to you with the wisdom (that calls you to acknowledge Allah’s oneness and to make evident to you some of the points upon which you differ. Therefore, be pious to Allah, and obey me.
    64. “Indeed, Allah alone is my Lord and your Lord; worship Him alone. This is a straight Path”
    65. Yet the various parties (Christian sects and factions differed from each other and disagreed among themselves regarding the end of `Isa). And so woe to those who did injustice from the torment of a painful day.
    66. What do they expect (after their refusal to acknowledge Allah), other than the sudden confrontation with the (predetermined) Hour (that they will encounter unexpectedly) as it takes them unawares !
    67. There and then those who were close fellows in wrongdoing will become enemies, but not that of those who were pious to Allah.
    68.  (They [the devotees] will be addressed by Allah:) “O My worshipers (who reverenced Me), no fear will fall upon you this day, nor will you come to grief (you are delivered from the punishment and Allah has assured you His favor).
    69. “(You) who believed in Our signs and submitted yourselves to Him and were Muslims.”
    70. (They will be honorably told,) “Now enter you and your wives into the Garden, where you will be jubilant (and rejoiced beyond a common joy).”
    71. There they will be passed around them dishes of gold, and golden goblets; and within there, they will find anything they crave for and that the eyes delight in. And there you will abide to eternity.
    72. They will be told, indicating the perfect favor Allah has conferred on them, “And so, this is the Garden you have come to inherit by Divine grant for your deeds (that were imprinted with wisdom and piety).”
    73. There you have plenteous fruits (that afford you pleasure); they are for you whereof you eat.
    74. But in Hell, the kingdom of eternal torment, the criminals will bewail their lot.
    75. No mitigation will be expected, and the longer they lose hope, the more they are dumbfounded.
    76. We never acted unjustly or unfairly to them. It was they who acted unjustly and unfairly to themselves (and were wrongdoers for preferring wrongdoing to guidance).
    77. There and then they will call upon Malik (the head keeper of Hell) to mediate suspension of punishments. “O Malik,” they will say, “appeal to Allah your Lord to decree upon us (and blot us out of existence and extinguish our debt).” “Never,” Malik will say. “In here you remain.”
    78. Our Messenger has come to you with the Truth, but most of you hate the Truth.
    79. Or have they planned a course (and set their hearts on denying the truth and plotting your [Muhammad’s] death)? But it is We Who are having the Authority.
    80. Or do they reckon that We do not hear their secret and their private conferences? Indeed, (omniscience is inherent in Us) and Our messengers (angels) close to them writing everything.
    81. Say to them, “If Allah, The All-Merciful, had a son, I would (precede all others and) be the first to worship Him.”
    82. All Extolment be to Him, Allah, the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne (of supreme majesty, omnipotence, grace, and mercy)! Far be He beyond all measure and above all they attribute to Him!
    83. Let them wade and play, Muhammad, in the nonsensical and in vanities and engage in amusement, until the encounter with the day they have been promised.
    84. And He is the God (Who is worshiped) in the heavens and the God (Who is worshiped) on earth, and He is All-Wise and All-Knowing.  
    85. And blessed be He Who has the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and of all that lies between them (seen or unseen), Who alone knows the time of the (predetermined and eventful) Hour; and back to Him alone will all of you return (for requital).  
    86. Nor will those whom they (the disbelievers) invoke and venerate apart from Him have the power of intercession. It is a privilege restricted only to those who had witnessed to the Truth and the oneness of Allah and knowingly bore witness to this truth.
    87. And if you should ask those idolaters, Muhammad, who has created them, they will say, “Allah.” How strongly are they diverged from Truth! 
    88. Muhammad expressed discontent at his people and said, “O Allah my Lord, these are a people who do not believe.”
    89. Leave them alone and bear with them and pardon them, Muhammad, and say to them “Peace!” Then they will come to know (the fatal consequence of their obsession with follies).


