SURAH 44
AD-DUKHAN
Smoke
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts by stating that the Qur’an was revealed on a blessed night (Laylat Al-Qadr) to serve as a witness and warning; it is the true Book. It also speaks about resurrection, stressing that it is certain and undoubted. It discusses the precepts of those who deny it and refutes them, comparing the idolaters of Makkah to their ancestors, the people of Pharaoh, and mentions Allah’s retribution that afflicted them. Then it stresses that the Day of Judgment is the day of the final decision between faith and disbelief; it speaks about the requital of the disbelievers and the reward of the faithful. Then it ends with talking about the Qur’an and threatening those who deny it with the misfortunes and calamities that await them.

    1. H (ha). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. Allah has given a solemn declaration by the Qur’an, which is the evident Book.
    3. We have sent down the Qur’an on a blessed and highly esteemed night. We have sent the messenger as a witness and a warning (and to entrust to him an authoritative Book).
    4. A night in which every wise Command from Him is decreed. (The Qur’an is the absolute source of wisdom that distinguishes the right from the wrong, and that is why it was revealed in that night.)
    5. It is an ordinance from Us. We are ever sending messengers
    6. Sending messengers to convey to the people mercy by Allah your Lord to His creatures. He is, indeed, All-Hearer, All-Knower.
    7. He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, in case you have certitude (that it is Allah Who revealed the Qur’an as a mercy and guidance).
    8. There is no god but Him. He gives life and causes death. He is Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.
    9. Yet the disbelievers are in doubt, playing. And they follow their whims and desires.
    10. You just wait, Muhammad. There comes a day when the heaven will come up with evident smoke. 
    11. There and then, the smoke will envelop mankind, and they will say, “This is really painful torment!”
    12. Then they will plead to Allah saying, “O Allah, our Lord, lift off the torment. We are believers”
    13. But in what way and by what means will they be reminded? Our Messenger brought them the clear message (supported by miracles that attest to its truthfulness).
    14. And they refused to believe in the Messenger and turned away from him and said, “He is a man taught (by others); a madman.” 
    15. But Allah replied, “We will, for a while, lift the torment a little; but you will return (to disbelief).” 
    16. Remember, Messenger, that there will come the day when We assault the blow that is severe. Indeed, We will take just vengeance on them. 
    l7. And long before the disbelievers of Makkah, We had tempted the people of Pharaoh. There came to them a noble messenger, Musa (Moses).
    18. He said to them, “Deliver to me the bondmen of Allah. I am to you a trustworthy Messenger.”
    19. “You should not exalt yourselves for disbelieving in Allah your Lord. I come to present you with evident authority.”
    20. “And here I take refuge with Allah, my Lord and your Lord, that you should not stone me to death.
    21. “And if you do not believe me, then leave me alone and keep apart from me.”
    22. There and then did Musa make devout and humble supplications to Allah his Lord, and said, “These are a criminal people.”
    23. “March with My servants (to the sea) by night,” he was told. “You will be followed.”
    24. “And (after you have struck the sea with your staff and made a footpath for your people across), let the sea return to its settled calm. They are a host destined to drown.”
    25. And so, how plentiful was what they left behind! They were in a condition of abundance, with gardens and springs, 
    26. And all kinds of vegetal growth and products of the soil and mansions and stately homes, 
    27. And luxuriating in power and in abundance of the necessities and comforts of life.
    28. Thus did Allah punish those who disobeyed Him, and put other people of a different race and creed in possession and make them the heirs; whereas their name was all they left.
    29. And neither the heaven nor the earth shed tears over them. They were not going to weep at what they were glad for, nor was the just punishment of the wicked meant to be put in respite.
    30. There and then did Allah deliver the Children of Isra'il from the degrading torment.
    31. He delivered them from Pharaoh, who beheld his unfortunate people from an exalted throne and who was of the extravagant (aggressor).
    32. And We chose them, by knowledge, over the worlds.
    33. And Allah brought them from the clear signs what was an evident trial (of their actions and reactions).
    34. Yet these (Quraysh) who deny resurrection insolently say, 
    35. “We only die once (when we come to our life’s end) and we will not be resurrected.” 
    36. And they add, “If you, Muhammad, together with those who have fallen into are sincere, then bring back our forefathers.”
    37. Are they, the Makkan disbelievers, better in power, authority, and worldly conditions than the people of Tubba` and their predecessors? Your people, Muhammad, are not better than they, yet We caused them to perish; surely they were criminals.
    38. Nor did We create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, playing. 
    39. We have not created both of them except in conformity with truth. But most of them do not know.
    40. Indeed, the day of Verdict is the calculated time (and the moment of impact eventful) to them all.
    41. This is the Eventful Day when no patron will avail his subordinates, nor can a subordinate avail his patron. But like man, like master, and no one can offer them vindication.
    42. Except those to whom Allah will extend His mercy. He is The All-Mighty and The Ever-Merciful.
    43. There and then the (ugly, bitter, disagreeable) tree of Zaqqum,  
    44. Will be the food of the vicious sinner.
    45. Food that is like molten metals will keep boiling inside the bellies, 
    46. Like scalding water (water brought to the utmost boiling point).
    47. “Seize him (angels posted as sentinels keeping guard of the Fire) and thrust him (the sinner) into the depths of Hell-Fire.
    48. “And pour over his head torrents of painfully tormenting scoalding water.”
    49. “Now taste and see,” he is told, “You tasted the pleasure of your might, and you preferred might and honor.
    50. “This punishment you experience now is the just what you wrangled about.”
    51. But those who are pious (revering Allah) will be privileged with safe-conduct and security.
    52. Amid (beautiful) gardens and (dazzling) springs.
    53. Dressed in silk gowns and ornamented brocade and seated in opposite directions (enjoying the glory of Heaven).
    54. Thus it will be, and, moreover, We will join them in wedlock to beautiful creatures with attractive eyes).
    55. Whatever fruit they ask for will be given with surety. They have been given security.
    56. They will suffer no death other than the first death they had encountered, and now they have been saved the torment of the Hell-Fire.
    57. An efficacious grace of Allah your Lord effecting the magnificent triumph (for which it is given).
    58. We made it easy for you, Muhammad, to recite the Qur’an and communicate it in your tongue and theirs (so that it takes effect and influences your people) that they may comprehend.
    59. Therefore, be on the watch. You will come to know what fate awaits them, and, likewise, they are also waiting.



