SURAH 45
AL-JATHIYAH
Kneeling in Adoration and in Humiliation
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with two letters of the Arabic alphabet, assuring mankind that the Qur’an is an authentic and authoritative revelation from Allah. Then it shows some cosmic and intellectual evidence attesting to the reality of faith. It calls people to adhere to faith and asks Allah to afflict those who deny it. Then the surah recounts Allah’s favors and grace on His servants and directs the believers to forgive those who denied Allah, as it is Allah alone Who requites each self with what is commensurate with its deeds. Then the surah mentions the favors Allah has conferred on the Children of Isra'il and the dispute among them that Allah will settle on the Day of Judgment. It makes clear distinctions between those who believed in the truth and those who followed their whims and, by consequence, denied the resurrection and challenged Allah’s omnipotence by asking Him to bring their forefathers to life again. It is Allah Who brings the dead back to life and takes life from the living, to Whom everything belongs. And the day when they will be resurrected, each self will be called to look at its book. There and then the believers will win and the arrogant will be rebuked. Then the surah returns to talking about their denial of the predetermined Hour, the signs that prove its truthfulness, and their banishment from Allah’s mercy as they neglected to reflect on this day. It also stresses that their end will be in Hellfire in requital for their mocking Allah’s signs and clinging to this life below. The surah ends with praising the Creator of the heavens and the earth, The All-Mighty and All-Wise.

    1. H (ha). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.
    2. It (the Qur’an) is a Book that is sent down from Allah, The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.
    3. The heavens and the earth are, indeed, abounding in signs for the believers.      
    4. And in the creation of you people, and in the dissemination of all kinds of beasts are signs for a people who have certitude.
    5. And (the variation in duration, besides) the constant alternation and succession of the night and the day, and the rain Allah sends down from heaven with which He revives the earth after its death. And the air in motion in the various directions are signs (of His omnipotence and authority) for people who consider. 
    6. So, these are signs that Allah related to the people. We recite to you in truth by Jibril (Angel Gabriel). If they (the disbelievers) refuse to acknowledge the truth that is featured in these signs from Allah, then in which discourse will they believe?
    7. Woe to every vicious falsifier!
    8. Who hears Allah’s signs when they are recited. He intentionally insists on denying them and is inordinately proud as if he had not heard them. Tell him, Muhammad, to expect a painful torment.
    9. And when this wicked one knows any of Our signs, he (ridicules) and mocks them. Such persons have a degrading torment.
    10. Hell awaits them. There and then, nothing they earned here will avail them, nor will those whom they took as patrons apart from Allah benefit them, and they will have a tremendous torment.
    11. This Qur’an is the truth guiding to all truth. And those who disbelieve in Allah’s signs will suffer a painful torment of chastisement. 
    12. Allah is He Who subjected the sea to you so that ships may run on it for transportation by His Command, so that you may seek His Graceful bounties of the sea, and so that you might be thankful (by worshiping Him alone).
    13. And He reduced to a state of subservience for you all that is in the heavens and the earth. Everywhere are signs of His omnipotence and authority for people who meditate.
    14. Say, Muhammad, to those whose hearts believed in Allah, to forgive and give up resentment against those who neither expect nor desire the day when Allah will recompense people with what they earned.
    15. He who does a good deed will have benefited his own self, and he who does odious deeds will have lost his own soul. Ultimately all of you will be brought back to Allah your Lord.
    16. We brought the Children of Isra'il the Book and authority and soundness of judgment (in the choice of means and ends), and bestowed on them the divine prerogative of prophethood. We provided them with foods of various good and wholesome kinds, and We graced them over the worlds. 
    17. And We brought them with clear divine evidences of Our Command, yet they did not disagree among themselves and be at variance until they had received knowledge of the truth, due to being inequitable among themselves. But Allah your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection on the points upon which they used to differ.
    18. Then We determined for you, Muhammad, the Law of the Command, the perfect exemplar of excellence, so follow (the Law), and do not follow the prejudices of those who do not know.
    19. Those disbelievers who wish that you might follow them cannot avail you against Allah’s punishment. In fact, the unjust wrongdoers are patrons of each other, whereas Allah is the Patron of the pious.
    20. This Qur’an is revealed to you as demonstrations for mankind and a guide and a mercy to a people who have certitude.
    21. Or do those who indulge in odious deeds conceive that We assess them in life and death as We ascribe to those who have believed and done righteous deeds? How odious is their judgment!
    22. Allah created the heavens and the earth in accordance with the truth. He requites every self with what is commensurate with what it has earned, and they will not be unjustly wronged.
    23. Have you seen, Muhammad, the one who has taken his prejudice as his god, knowing that he is doing wrong? And on that ground Allah led him into error, sealing his hearing and his heart and made a cover on his sight! When he is so conditioned, who then, after Allah, can guide him to the path of righteousness? Will you people not remember?
    24. And those who deny the future life said, “There is only this present life, we die and live, until time does away with life and destroys this world.” They say so having no knowledge, but they only conjecture and surmise. 
    25. And when Our clear and evident signs are recited to them (indicating Our omnipotence to effect resurrection), the only argument (in support of their notion) is thus: “Bring our fathers back to life if, indeed, you are sincere.”
    26. Say to them, Muhammad, “Allah has brought you to this world (and caused your existence from nothingness), and He causes your death when you end your days, then He brings you together on the Day of Resurrection, the Day that gives no occasion to uncertainty. But most people do not know this fact.
    27. And to Allah alone belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and when the predetermined final Hour arrives at the defined time, there and then, those who assert falsehood will lose.
    28. And you will see every nation falling on their knees (with horror compounded of pain and fear). Each nation is being called to account according to its Book (their good or bad records), and each will be told, “Today you are recompensed with (what is commensurate with) your deeds.”
    29. They will also be told, “This is Our book of records in which entry of your deeds has been made in truth, which will truthfully testify against you. We have kept a register in which Our angels wrote your deeds.”
    30. So those who believed and did righteousness, Allah their Lord will make them enter into the realm of His mercy, a state of evident triumph.
    31. But as to those who disbelieved in Allah and His messengers, they will be rebuked: “Have Our messengers not come to you, and have Our Signs not been recited to you, but you were proudly arrogant and you were an unjust people!
    32. “And when Our Messenger related to you that the promise of Allah is the absolute truth and that the predetermined final Hour is above suspicion, you always stated explicitly, ‘We do not know what the predetermined final Hour is. In effect, our opinion of it is only a surmise formed on no certitude.’ ”
    33. There and then will their odious deeds present themselves to them, and now on all sides they will be redounded by what they used to mock.
    34. And they are rebuked: “Now is the Day We forget you, as you have forgotten the meeting of this Day; therefore, your abode is the Fire and you have no vindicators.
    35. “A penalty imposed on you people for your mockery of Allah’s Signs (that demonstrated omnipotence and authority), and you were also deluded by the enjoyment (you regarded as the chief object of life).” Therefore, now such persons will not get out of it, nor will they be allowed to make amends
    36. Praise be to Allah (and extolled are His glorious attributes) the Lord of the heavens and the earth and the Lord of the worlds.
    37. It is He alone Who has the Supreme Grandeur in the heavens and on earth. And He is The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.



