SURAH 46
Al-AHQAF
The Sandy Hills
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah stresses that it is Allah Who revealed the Qur’an, and stresses that it is incumbent to believe in it and in Muhammad. It gives special attention to reminding people to reflect on the end of those who disobeyed Allah and His Messenger and calls upon them to be dutiful to their parents and care for their needs. It also refers to the story of a group of jinn who listened to the Qur’an and called upon one another to attentively listen to it. And they concluded that it is in complete accordance with the messages brought by the prophets who came before Muhammad; that is, it guides to the truth and path of righteousness, so they believed in it and called upon their people to believe in it. The surah ends by appealing to the Prophet to remain patient with his people for denying his message and to do as did the resolute among the messengers before him.    

    1. H (ha). M (mim). The surah starts with these introductory letters from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s tongue, cannot be emulated.  
    2. It is a Book sent down by Allah (in complete glory). Allah  is The All-Mighty and The All-Wise!
    3. We have not created the heavens, the earth, and all that lies between them but in accordance with the Truth and for a determined period of time. Yet those who disbelieve in it are veering away and disregard the warning (of resurrection for requital).
    4. Say to those who invoke deities apart from Allah, “Tell me about those you invoke apart from Allah and show me what in the world you live in did they create of the earth, or do they claim participation in the process of the creation of the heavens?” Say to them, “Bring me a book revealed before this Book (the Qur’an), or bring me traces of knowledge in a book if you sincerely speak the truth!”
    5. And who can commit error and stray from the path of righteousness greater than he who invokes apart from Allah a creature who will never respond to him till the Day of Resurrection? Nor are such creatures heedful of their invocation.
    6. And when mankind are mustered before Allah for judgment, they will see those whom they invoked here at enmity with them in the Hereafter. They will disbelieve in having been worshiped (by the associators).  
    7. Yet when Our evident and signs are recited to them, then those who disbelieved in Allah would say about the truth presented to them, “This is evident sorcery (assumed by him, the Messenger).”
    8. Or do those disbelievers say “He (Muhammad) has fabricated it (and attributed it to Allah)”? Say to them, “If I have fabricated it, you cannot defend me from Allah and vindicate my cause?” Allah knows best what you confide among yourselves; but Allah is enough to be a witness of (my truthfulness and of your falsehood), and He is The Oft-Forgiving and The Ever-Merciful.”
    9. Say to them, “I am not an innovator among the messengers; nor do I know what Allah will do to me or to you. I only follow what is revealed to me by Allah (and do what I am commanded to do), and I am an evident warner.”
    10. Say to them, “What if this Book (the Qur’an) is a divine disclosure of knowledge by Allah to man, and you disbelieved in it when it has been acknowledged by one of the Children of Isra'il who testifies that it is from Allah?” Yet he believed in it and you waxed proud? But Allah does not guide the unjust people.
    11. And those who disbelieve in Allah speak to those who sincerely believed in Him and they say, “If it (the Qur’an) were good, they would not have taken it before us.” And so, since they have not been guided by the Qur’an, they will label it “Falsehood”.
    12. And before the Qur’an, Allah sent the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) as a guidance and mercy (to those who adhere to it), and this Qur’an that they deny is sincerely verifying the Books revealed before it. Allah sent it in the Arab tongue, warning the unjust wrongdoers, and serving as blissful tidings to the fair-doers.
    13. Those who have said, “Allah is our Lord”, and have gone straight; these will have no ground for fear, nor will they grieve.  
    14. These adherents of monotheism and righteousness are the companions of the Garden where they will have passed to eternity in requital of their (meritorious actions and their wise and pious) deeds.
    15. We enjoined on man to be dutiful to his parents. With travail his mother bears him and brings him forth; and between bearing him, nursing, and weaning him, she spends thirty months of bodily and mental hardship. Then when he has grown to maturity and attained the age of forty, he invokes Allah, “O Allah my Lord, dispense me by being grateful to You for the efficacious favor You have conferred on me and on my parents, that I do righteous deeds, and that You make my offspring righteous. Now I repent of the wrongdoings I have done, and I am one of the Muslims.”
    16. These are they whose best deeds Allah will count for righteousness, and He will overlook their wrongdoings, and destine them to make abode in the Garden, a promise of truth, which they were promised.  
    17. But he who contemptuously says to his parents (when they call upon him to believe in resurrection), “Fie on you! Do you offer me ground of expectation of resurrection when all generations who departed life long ago have never come out (of their graves)?” Both parents exercise pity and appeal to Allah for help, and they say to their son, “Woe to you! Believe in Allah, Whose promise is true.” But he says to them, “This is nothing but myths of the earliest people.”
    18. Those who say that among preceding generations of the jinn and mankind were those against whom the Word was fulfilled; it was their destiny to suffer loss.
    19. There are grades for both (Muslims and disbelievers), grades commensurate with their deeds, Allah paying them in full (for Allah is vigilant); no one will be done injustice.  
    20. One day those who disbelieved in Allah will be exposed to the Fire and be told, “You put away with the good things Allah bestowed you in life, and you took your enjoyment with them. Therefore, this day you will be subjected to the torment of humiliation in requital of your untruthful pride and your immorality.”
    21. Mention, Muhammad, to your people the story of Hud, a brother of the people of `Ad (a witness and warning). He warned his people, who inhabited the valley of the sandy hills (al-ahqaf), especially when other warners preceded and others succeeded him. He said to them, “Worship none but Allah, for I fear for you an immense torment on a great day.”
    22. His people, the `Ad, denied him saying, “Have you come to us to falsely diverge us from our gods? Bring about what you have promised us if, indeed, you are of the sincere ones!”
    23. Hud said, “The knowledge of the timing of your punishment lies entirely with Allah. I only proclaim to you the message entrusted to me by Allah, but I do see that you are so ignorant (that you do not perceive the messages brought by the messengers).”
    24. Allah’s punishment approached them in the form of a cloud drifting to their valleys. And when they saw it they said, “This is a cloud whose rain will bring a rainbow of hope.” “This,” said Hud, “is what you have challenged to be hastened on. It is but a wind wherein there is a painful torment. 
    25. It is destroying everything by its Lord's (Allah’s) Command.” So, nothing could be seen in the morning but the remains of their empty homes. Thus We recompense a people given to crime.  
    26. We had endowed them with power to a greater degree than what you (people of Makkah) have. We conferred on them the power of hearing and seeing, and We conferred on them thought; but they took bad advantage of hearing, seeing, and thought. They repudiated Allah’s revelations and signs, and they were redounded by what they used to mock at.  
    27. And We have caused the towns all around you, people of Makkah to perish. We propounded to them many signs, so that they would return their thoughts to Allah (but they did not).  
    28. Did those whom they worshiped and took as mediators apart from Allah offer them aid or vindication? Never! On the contrary, they erred away from them. This is the result of their falsehood and what they used to fabricate.
    29. And remember, Muhammad, that We resolved to direct some of the jinn to the place where they were to listen to you reciting the Qur’an. When they were within hearing, a command to be quiet was uttered by some and they listened to the end of the recital.  They hastened back to their people, warning them of disbelief (and calling them to faith).
    30. “Our people,” they said, “we have just heard a recital of Allah’s revelations from a sublime Book revealed as a successor to the Book sent down to Musa. It is sincerely verifying the truth of all the divine Books sent before it. It is a straight way of truth guiding to all truth of faith and to a straight way.”
    31. “Our people,” they added, “respond favorably to the man entrusted by Allah to guide you to all truth, and believe in him and give credence to Allah so that He may forgive your sins and give you protection from a painful torment.
    32. “And he who does not answer the caller to Allah to guide people to all truth, must realize that he will not be defiant to Allah, nor can he be under the guardianship of anyone other than Allah.” Such persons are in evident error.
    33. Can they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and did not falter by their creation, is able to resurrect the dead (and restore them to life)? He is Determiner to do all things.  
    34. One day those who disbelieved in Allah will be exposed to the Fire and will be asked, “Is this punishment not consistent with the truth (that We warned you of in life below)?” “By Allah our Lord,” they will say, “indeed, it is.” Therefore, they will be told, “Now taste the torment for you used to disbelieve.”
    35. Therefore, in patience, Muhammad, be patient, as did the resolute among the messengers. And do not wish their punishment to be hastened on (for it will certainly afflict them). When they see what they are promised, they think that they had lasted for no more than an hour of the time of daylight. This is a proclamation. Only those who immorally disobeyed Allah will be made to perish.



