SURAH 47
MUHAMMAD
Muhammad the Prophet
Revealed at Madinah
 In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.   
    This surah makes it clear in the beginning that Allah has canceled the value of the disbelievers’ deeds for their adherence to deviation, and He has forgiven the believers’ sins for their adherence to the truth. It also explains in detail the duty of defending the truth, which is only requited with Gardens of bliss and unsurpassed beauty, and urges the believers to support Allah’s religion and fight in its cause. It also points out that when the wrongdoers abandon faith, they make mischief and create discord on earth and break the ties of common blood. It warns the believers of listening to the discouraging words of the hypocrites and threatens the hypocrites that Allah will disclose their secret hatred of the Prophet. It calls upon the believers not to weary in fighting the disbelievers, for the believers are in control of the situation and have the upper hand. Allah stands by them to protect and defend them, and He will not reduce or cancel the value of their efforts. Then the surah ends with inviting the people to spend all that they can afford in the cause of Allah. It points out that some of them will show unwillingness, but he who is parsimonious and unwilling will only deny himself the due requital of spending. If the people turn a deaf ear, Allah will replace them with other people who will not be the same.

    1. Those who disbelieve (in Allah and His Messenger) and bar from the way of Allah, Allah has imprinted their deeds with irreverence and error.
    2. But those who believed in Allah, and their deeds were righteous, and they believed in all that has been revealed to the Prophet Muhammad and it is the Truth from Allah their Lord—Allah has expiated for them their odious deeds and made good their state.  
    3. Such outcomes were, indeed, befitting because those who disbelieved in Allah follow untruth, while those who believed in Allah follow the Truth from Lord. Thus Allah sets forth similitudes for mankind.
    4. So conditioned, when you encounter those disbelievers in Allah (in combat), strike their necks (to inflict death), and when you weaken them, subdue the living at their peril and keep them in confinement. There and then, either set the captives free for nothing in return, or for a ransom, or for the freedom of Muslim captives, and stick to this course till the war lays down its encumbrances. This is Allah’s ordinance, and had Allah willed, He would have vindicated Himself against them. But He means to distinguish the believers from the disbelievers by trying some of you against others (ordaining jihad). And remember that those of you who fought to acquire the glorious privilege of martyrdom in the way of Allah, He will never let their deeds in error. 
    5. He will guide them and make their state righteous.
    6. And He will make them into the Garden, which He has acquainted them.
    7. O you who believe, in case you vindicate Allah, He will grant you victory over your enemy and help you take a firm position and set your feet firm.
    8. But those who disbelieve, He will afflict with the miseries of misfortune and their deeds will err away.
    9. This is because they hate all that Allah has sent down of the Qur’an (and its rules), and so He doomed their hopes to disappointment and frustration.
    10. Have they not journeyed through the land and looked to see the fatal consequence of those who disbelieved the messengers who came before them—how Allah laid them low in horrible destruction? Likewise, those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger will face the same end.
    11. That (supporting the believers and defeating the disbelievers) is because Allah is the Patron of the believers, and the disbelievers have no patron.
    12. Indeed, Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds Gardens under which rivers run. While those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat and the Fire will be their lodging. 
    13. How many towns did We make to perish—towns that were more powerful than your town [Makkah] (which drove you out of your home). Yet no one was there to vindicate them.
    14. (Are both parties equal in requital?) Can he who has an evidence from His Lord be like him whose deeds were adorned for him, and those who followed their prejudices? 
    15. The Garden of bliss—promised to those who are pious—where rivers flow with untainted, pure fresh water, rivers flowing with tasteful, unchanging, immutable milk, rivers flowing with wine making glad those who drink it, and rivers flowing with strained honey. A Garden in which grow all kinds of fruits and the grace of their Lord's (Allah’s) forgiveness. Does this blissful state compare with the state in which one suffers the eternal abode in the Fire, where the inmates are forced to drink scalding water cutting up their bowels?
    16. Among the disbelievers is a group who listen to you, Muhammad (while their ears are closed). And when they leave at the end of your speech, they ask your faithful associates who know the facts, “What was it that Muhammad has just said?” These are they whose hearts Allah has stamped (with dullness of disbelief), and they follow their prejudices.
    17. But those who have been guided, Allah has increased them in guidance, and brought them their piety.
    18. Do they intend to remain (in their state of disbelief) until they suddenly face the foreordained Hour? But its portents have come (to peoples’ knowledge). And, so, where can they turn when their reminder comes upon them?
    19. Therefore, Muhammad, you must know that there is no god except Allah. Invoke His forgiveness on your behalf for anything you have done wrongly and on behalf of the believers, men and women. Allah knows all your activities (during daylight) and all your doings (when you rest) in your homes.
    20. And those who have believed say, “If only a surah would be sent down (ordaining fighting)!”  Yet when a decisive surah is sent down, and therein fighting is mentioned, then you see those in whose hearts is a disease look at you with countenances like that of someone enveloped by the swooning of death; yet worthier of them would be. 
    21. Willing obedience coupled with beneficent words expressing desire for action (should have been their response); and when Allah’s Command comes about (and fighting becomes incumbent), then if their actions accord with their words, it would be more advantageous to them.
    22.And if you people turn away and fail to obey Allah’s Command, then do you intend to corrupt in the earth and sever your ties of kinship?
    23. Such persons are those whom Allah has cursed, and so has made them deaf and blinded their sight.
    24. Do they not contemplate and meditate upon the Qur’an, or do they have locks upon their hearts?
    25. Those apostates who have turned back in their traces after the guidance has been made evident to them were victims of Satan, who took advantage of them, incited them, and reprieved them.
    26. They turned apostates when they said to those who hated all that Allah has sent down and His religion, “We will obey you in some of the Command.” But Allah knows the secrets of those hypocrites. 
    27. This is what they were in life below, so how will they react when the angels take them up in death, striking their faces and their hind parts?
    28. That it is because they followed what called forth Allah's Wrath and hated His Satisfaction, so He frustrated their deeds.
    29. Or do these people whose hearts are diseased think that Allah will not bring out their malicious feelings (against His Messenger and the believers)?
    30. Had We willed, We would have shown them to you, Muhammad, and you would have recognized them by the marks (imprinted on their sinister faces). But in any case, you will recognize them when they express their distorted sayings. Allah knows all that you do.
    31. In fact, We will most certainly try you people to distinguish those who strive hard for Allah’s purpose and who work patiently (in His cause in hardships and welfare), and to ascertain your tidings (when you engage in the practical test of actual experience).
    32. Those who disbelieved in Allah and stood in the way to prevent Allah’s truth from guiding people to all truth and who obstinately forsook the Messenger after the guidance was made evident to them (by Heaven and by men), will not harm Allah in the least. But He will soon frustrate their deeds.
    33. O you who believe, obey (the commands of) Allah and obey the Messenger’s call, and do not render your deeds void (and devoid of real value).
    34. Indeed, those who have disbelieved and prevented Allah’s truth from guiding people to all truth and who have died in disbelief, Allah will never forgive them.
    35. Therefore do not be feeble in strength of purpose when you fight your enemies, nor be tempted to invite them to peace (due to fear of them). For by faith you are the exalted. Remember that Allah is with you (to protect you and defend you), and He will not divest you of your deeds.
    36. And life here is but playing and diversion. But if you believe and be pious, He will bring you your rewards, and He will not ask you to spend all your wealth in His cause. 
    37. For if Allah were to ask you to spend all your wealth in His cause and importune heavily on you, you would be miserly, and then He would have exposed your unwillingness (and your secret grudge against spending).
    38. You people are invited to spend all that you can afford in the cause of Allah. Some of you will show miserliness, and he who is miserly and unwilling will only harm himself. And remember that Allah is Rich (Free of all wants) and (if you are as dependent on Him as indeed you are, then) you are poor enough. And if you people turn away, He will replace you with other people who will not be the same.


