SURAH 48
AL-FATH
The Opened Gates of Victory
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens by describing the great victory that Allah has conferred on His Messenger and its great consequences for both the propagation of Islam and the reinforcement of the Muslims. It upholds the hearts of the believers so that they are more and more impressed with faith. The surah describes the punishment of the hypocrites and of the idolaters and sends Muhammad as a witness and warning to reinforce the belief in Allah. Then it talks about the pledge the believers took to the Prophet, and points out that the excuse of those who did not go out with the Prophet was false. They dropped behind because they thought that Allah would not grant him victory, but when Allah did, they offered to go with the Prophet to collect the war booty.
    Then the surah states that those stay-at-home Arabs will be called upon to march to a land whose people face danger boldly, firmly, and courageously with powerful vehement opposition. It says that the one who cannot go out for war due to a true excuse incurs no blame on himself. It shows how great was the reward that Allah promised those whom He held dear in the Pledge of Radwan. The surah depicts the defeat of the disbelievers whenever they encounter the Muslims on the battlefield and explains why Allah restrained from hostility the hands of both the enemies and the believers in the precincts of Makkah. The surah ends by assuring that Allah has made the Prophet’s dream of entering the Inviolable Mosque come true, and that Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are unrelenting in combat with those who deny Allah but thoughtful of each other. The surah depicts the signs by which the believers are known. Their description was mentioned in both the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]). The surah then mentions Allah’s promise to those who believe and imprint their deeds with wisdom and piety of inclusive forgiveness and a great reward.

    1. We have opened for you, Muhammad, the way to a great victory (by supporting the truth against falsehood). 
    2. Allah forgives you all your faults of the past and future, complements His bounty and favor on you (by propagating your call), and guides you on a straight Path. 
    3. And that Allah may grant you a mighty victory.
    4. It was He Who sent down peace and tranquility to the hearts of the believers so that their hearts might be impressed with belief along with their belief. And to Allah alone belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth. He administers them as He wills, and Allah is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    5. (He administers them) so that He may admit those men and women who believe in Allah and His Messenger to Gardens, beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will have passed to eternity, and He erases and expiates their sins. It pleases Allah to confer such a great triumph. 
    6. And like that, He afflicts the hypocrites, men and women, and those who associate other deities with Him and who surmise evil of Allah. The evil thoughts will rebound and recoil on them. They provoked His anger against them, and He has cursed them. He has prepared for them the abode in Hell, and odious indeed is the destination.
    7. For again, to Allah belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth. (He administers them by His wisdom as He wills,) and He is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    8. We have sent you, Muhammad, to be a witness who will testify (to the response of your people and the people before), and to deliver the joyful news to those whose hearts have believed, and to be a warning
    9. So that you people may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and rally to Him, and revere Him as He deserves, and extol His glorious attributes at the beginning and at the end of the day.
    10. Those who pledge allegiance to you Muhammad, in effect, it is to Allah that they pledge allegiance. The Hand of Allah is over their hands. And he who breaches his oath harms only himself, and he who fulfills the covenant he made to Allah will be greatly rewarded by Allah.
    11. The stay-at-home desert Arabs will say to you when you come back, Muhammad, “(We were unable to be part of your expedition and join battle) on account of our constant attention to our commercial transactions and to our families, and we seek your help in invoking Allah’s forgiveness on our behalf.” They speak with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say to them, “Who is he who has power to restrain Allah from the coming of harm or profit? But, indeed, Allah is Ever-Cognizant of what you were doing.”
    12. In fact, you people surmised that the Messenger and the faithful believers (would be caught in the jaws of death and) would never return (safely) to their people. This anticipation allured your hearts with hopes of relief, and you held this woeful surmises in your hearts. You were a futile people (and incurred Allah’s wrath and punishment on you).
    13. He who does not believe in Allah and His Messenger must realize that Allah has prepared the fierce blazes of Hell for the disbelievers.
    14. To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills and subjects to torment whom He wills. And He is Oft-Forgiving, All-Merciful.
    15. And now when those Bedouins who lagged behind when you set forth to take the spoils that Allah promised, they will say to you, “Allow us to follow you,” thereby exchanging Allah’s word for theirs. Say to them, “You shall not come with us, for thus has Allah said previously.” They will say to you, “You only envy us (and fear that we may share with you what you hope to keep for yourselves).” How little, indeed, do they comprehend (Allah’s Command)!
    16. Say, Muhammad, to those stay-at-home Arabs, “You will be called upon to march to a land whose people oppose powerfully and vehemently. You fight them or they embrace Islam (surrender). And if you obey Allah’s Command, He will reward you graciously (in both this life below and in the Hereafter); but if you turn back as you did before, He will afflict you with a painful torment.”
    17. The blind, the lame, and the sick are absolved from guilt of not joining the fight against the disbelievers. He who obeys Allah and His Messenger will be welcomed by Allah into Gardens, beneath which rivers flow, and he who turns back will be tormented by Allah with a painful torment.
    18. How well satisfied was Allah with the believers as they willingly pledged allegiance to you under the tree (to devote themselves to Allah). He knew well what was in their hearts (and that they made the pledge with the deepest feeling). Therefore, He sent down serenity upon them and decreed to reward them with a victory that is quite near.
    19. This is in addition to the booty that will come exclusively into their possession in consequence of the event. And Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    20. Allah has given you a divine assurance of future booty to come into your possession (in due time). And so He expedited for you this taking the gains He promised you and restrained the people’s hands from hostilities against you so that it comes to be a sign to the believers of Allah’s fulfillment of His promise to them. He is well intentioned to guide you to the straight Path. 
    21. Allah also gave you a divine assurance of other booty (which are in the grip of your antagonists) whom you have not been able to overpower. Allah has encompassed them on all sides, and Allah is All-Determiner over all things.
    22. If the Makkan disbelievers had warred against you (and refrained from concluding a treaty with you), they would have withdrawn hastily and turned back; and they would never have found any patron or vindicator.
    23. This is the enactment of Allah, and it has long been pursued. (The victorious end will side with Allah’s Messengers and the believers,) and you people will not find a change in Allah’s enactment.
    24. It was He alone who restrained the hands of your enemy and your hands from hostilities against each other in the precincts of Makkah, after He had helped you win the victory over them. Allah is ever The All-Seer of what you do.
    25. These Makkans are the ones who have disbelieved and barred you from the Inviolable Mosque and the consecrated offering from reaching its lawful destination. Had it not been that you might tread injuriously, unawares, upon the faithful men and women believers residing among these Makkans—which believers you did not know nor could you recognize, and the error of injuring them would be a crime—We would have allowed you to march on Makkah. This is because Allah willed to extend His protection to the believers living among the Makkans and to the disbelievers who had recently adopted Islam. If the unknown believers had been distinguishable (in appearance), We would have tormented the disbelievers among the Makkans with a painful torment. 
    26. While the disbelievers cherished the haughtiness and furious passion of paganism, Allah sent down serenity on His Messenger and the faithful believers and imposed on them piety, virtues they merit and which belong to them by right. Allah is All-Knowing of all things.
    27. Allah fulfilled the vision He presented to His Messenger with the Truth of entering the Inviolable Mosque. Allah said, “You will enter the Inviolable Mosque, Allah willing, with peace and rightly free of apprehension, some with heads shaved and some with hair cut short, free of fear.” Allah knew the blessings and favors He kept for you by delaying your entrance to the Inviolable Mosque—which entrance you knew nothing about—so, He opened for you apart from that the way to a great victory.
    28. It is He who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of Truth (Islam) to make it the authoritative religion (over all religions). And Allah suffices as a Witness.
    29. Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are unrelenting in combat against the disbelievers and affectionate among themselves. You see them bowing in supplication and prostrating in adoration in quest of Allah’s efficacious grace and satisfaction (making His good will their aim). Their countenances bear trace of their repeated prostrating to Allah. This is how they are described earlier in the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]). Their similitude in the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa [Jesus]) is a seed that began to spring, putting forth its stalk, which grew stronger and stronger. Then it becomes thick and stands straight on its stem. It supported leaves, flowers, and fruits delighting the planters that He enrages the disbelievers. Those of them whose hearts have believed and who have done righteous deeds, Allah has promised to forgive them and grant them a magnificent reward. 

