SURAH 49
AL-HUJURAT
The Chambers of the Messenger’s Wives
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah starts with commanding the believers not to innovate a practice before Allah and His Messenger have commanded it, and not to raise their voices above the Prophet’s voice. It praises those who lower their voices in his presence and condemns those who ignore the manners and call to him when he is in his rooms. Then it commands the believers to verify news brought to them by the immoral and weak of faith. It instructs rulers what to do in case a fight breaks out between two groups of believers. It admonishes the believers not to laugh contemptuously at one another, nor to backbite each other, and to avoid suspicion in many instances, and to avoid conjecture of the existence of something evil or wrong without proof. It also admonishes the Bedouins not to allege that they have adopted the faith before it has settled in their hearts, and it explains who the faithful believers are. It ends with admonishing the people not to make Allah’s Messenger feel indebted to them for their having conformed to Islam. Rather, Allah is He Who obligates them for opening their hearts and influencing their appetite to faith, if, indeed, they say the truth.
 
    1. O you who believe, do not anticipate any matter (relating to religion or life) before Allah and His Messenger have ordained it, and be pious to Allah. He is The All-Hearer and The All-Knower.
    2. O you who believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet in case you are speaking to him, nor make your voices loud in the manner you speak to one another lest unawares your deeds be frustrated while you are not aware of it.
    3. Indeed, those who lower their voices when they have audience with the Messenger of Allah are those whose hearts Allah has filled with reverence and piety; they merit forgiveness and a great reward.
    4. Those who call you, Muhammad, from without your chambers—most of them do not have the sense. 
    5. If they had reconsidered it to wait patiently until you come out, it would have been better form them and Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    6. O you who believe, if ever there comes to you someone known to be immoral with an information, then be objectively certain of the truth of his story, lest you should inflict harm on people or defame them in ignorance and later be remorseful for what you have done.
    7. And you must realize that the Messenger of Allah is in your midst. If he were to submit to the wishes of you in many of the matters, distress would befall you. But Allah has made you love belief and adorned it in your hearts. He made you hate disbelief, immorality and disobedience. Only such persons are those who follow the path of safety and rectitude. 
    8. This is Grace and Favor from Allah; and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise. 
    9. If two sections of the believers should engage in warfare against each other, then reconcile them (and bring about peace between them). And if one of them is inequitable to the other (and rejects reconciliation), then fight against the inequitable until they concede to the Command of Allah. If they concede, then reconcile one to the other in accordance with justice, and exercise equity between people in all matters. Allah loves the equitable.
    10. Indeed, the believers (whose hearts believe in Allah and His Messenger) are an association of brothers. So reconcile your brothers (for the sake of brotherhood of faith), and be pious to Allah.
    11. O you who believe, let not any people scoff at another people. It may be that those scoffed at are better than the scoffers (in many aspects). Nor should women scoff at other women. It may be that those who are scoffed at are better than the scoffers (in many aspects). Moreover, do not defame one another or nickname each other by insulting or repulsive derogatory names. How bad it is to be called immoral or wicked after having professed belief! And those who do not repent (from what Allah forbade) are the unjust.
    12. O you who believe, avoid surmise in many instances (and the conjecture of the existence of something evil or wrong without proof). Surmise in some instances is, indeed, a vice. Nor play the spy upon Muslims’ faults, nor traduce or slander or backbite one another. Would any of you love to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Therefore, you hate backbiting, for it is similar to eating the flesh of one’s dead brother, and be pious to Allah, for Allah is Ever-Relenting, Ever-Merciful. 
    13. O people, We created you equal from the union of a pair, male and female (Adam and Hawwa’—Adam and Eve), and We made you races and tribes to get to be acquainted with each other (and cooperate with each other). The most honorable of you with Allah are the most pious. Allah is All-Knowing and All-Cognizant.
    14. The desert Arabs say to the Messenger, “We believe in Allah.” Say to them, Muhammad, “You have not yet believed, but you may say, ‘We have surrendered to your message.’” But belief has not yet entered your hearts. If you faithfully obey Allah and His Messenger, Allah will not withhold the reward of your good deeds. Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    15. Indeed, true believers are those who have solemnly believed in Allah and His Messenger and never since then have they had a reason to occasion uncertainty. They strove with their money and their lives in the cause of Allah. These alone are, indeed, sincerely true to their promises and to their faith.
    16. Say to them, Muhammad, “Are you going to teach your religion to Allah? Allah knows fully all in the heaven and all in the earth, and He is All-Knowing of everything.”
    17. They obligate you, Muhammad, and make you feel indebted to them for having become Muslims. Say to them, “Do not obligate me for conforming to Islam; but rather, Allah is He Who obligates you for guiding you to Islam, if indeed you are sincerely true (to your promises and to your faith).”
    18. Allah is, indeed, All-Knowing of all that is invisible and unknown and of all that is secretly disposed in the heavens and the earth. And Allah is The All-Seer of whatever you do.



