SURAH 50
QAF
The Letter Qaf and What It Represents
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    In the beginning, this surah speaks about the authenticity of Muhammad’s Message and about the disbelievers’ denial that a messenger may come from among themselves and their denial of resurrection after they are reduced to dust. It presents the cosmic evidence that nothing can keep Allah from bringing people back to life after death. It is He Who created them from nothing. He knows what man’s innermost being suggests secretly to him and what his heart forges. Man’s deeds and sayings are recorded in a meticulous book. The surah also points out the futility of the disbelievers’ attempts to rid themselves of disbelief on the Day of Judgment by holding their devil counterparts responsible. The argument between them will end with them all being thrown into Hellfire; whereas Allah will confer His eternal grace on the believers in Paradise. Then the surah ends by commanding the Prophet to be patient concerning the harm caused by the disbelievers who did not consider the end of those who came before them. It instructs him to adhere to worshiping Allah. It ascertains resurrection and consoles the Prophet by reminding him that he is only a witness and a warning from Allah.
 
    1. Q (qaf). This surah, like many others, starts with a letter from the Arabic alphabet to show that this Qur’an cannot be emulated and to alert the people to listen to it attentively. Allah solemnly declares by the glorious, noble, and sublime Qur’an (that He sent Muhammad to mankind as a warning), 
    2. But the people of Makkah did not believe in him. To the contrary, they wondered at the recognition of a man who came from their midst to warn them of resurrection. The disbelievers say, “It is, indeed, wondrous.
    3. “How can we be raised after death when we have been reduced to dust? This idea of resurrection is, indeed, a far return.”
    4. But We already know what the earth will regularly diminish of them (by death). We keep a Book where everything is preserved (and set down in a permanent form).
    5. Yet the disbelievers did not consider the truth when it was presented to them (by the Messenger). They were involved in confusion and anxiety.
    6. Did they not look at the heaven above them, unsupported by pillars or otherwise, and ponder how skillfully (powerfully, and authoritatively) We constructed and furnished it without any rifts? 
    7. And the earth, how We extended it and furnished it with mountains as anchorages, and in it We produced and caused the growth of a set of every kind of delightful vegetation.
    8. We made all of this to impart insight and a reminder to every penitent bondman.
    9. And how We sent down from the heaven showers of blessed rain and with it We caused to grow orchards and grain to be reaped.
    10. And the tall palm trees and ranged sprouting offshoots.
    11. We made them grow as a provision for people, and with rain We produce food for people and restore life to a dead land. And so also will be the going out (of the grave).
    12. Long before the Makkans, the people of Nuh (Noah) and those of the town of Rass and those of Thamud cried lies to the message of their messengers. 
    13. And so did the people of `Ad, those of Pharaoh, and the brothers of Lut (Lot). 
    14. And similarly did the forest dwellers and the people of the King of Yemen, the people of Tubba`, all of whom cried lies to the Messengers, so My threat came true.
    15. Did We falter with the first creation (and by consequence We cannot restore them)? Certainly, We can, and they attest to it. Yet they are confounded as to a new creation.
    16. It was We Who created man, and We know what his being whispers. And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.
    17. Two angels sit as receivers by his sides, right and left, constantly seated.
    18. Nothing he utters in saying but it is related by the two angels ready to keep a watchful guard.
    19. Then there comes the truth when he sinks into a stupor of death. “This,” he is told, “is what you tried hard to avert.”
    20. Then comes the moment when the trumpet is blown. This is the Day against which a threat has been given.
    21. And now comes every self driven to its destiny by one of the watchful angels, accompanied by a witness.
    22. Then the denier will be rebuked, “You did not perceive nor did you heed this day; and so, now that We have unveiled your covering, your sight today is sharp.” 
    23. Then his comrade will say, “This is the Record ready with me.”
    24. Then, the two watchful guards are told, “Cast into Hell everyone who stubbornly disbelieved in Allah.
    25. Who prevented charity, transgressed, and has suspicions. 
    26. “Who associated with Allah another god. And so put him to the severe torment.”
    27. His satanic comrade will say, “My Lord, I never incited him to transgress; he had erred and strayed from your way.”
    28. Then Allah will say to the disbelievers and their comrades, “Do not take adversary stands with each other in My presence. I sent you a threat and a warning (but you denied them).
    29. “No statement that has been affirmed regarding driving the disbelievers into Hell will be exchanged, nor am I unjust to My servants.”
    30. The day will come when We say to Hell, “Are you now full?” and it will say, “Are there any more?”
    31. And the Garden will be brought near to those who are pious, and it will be not far off.
    32. This is the bliss promised to the penitent who resorts to Allah and preserves the Command.
    33. Who is apprehensive of The All-Merciful in the Unseen, and who has a clean heart that has been impressed with wisdom and penitence.
    34. (Such persons will be welcomed into the beatitude of Heaven.) “Enter into My mercy,” Allah says, “peace be on you; this is the day of eternity.” 
    35. There they will have whatever they decide on (and everything We have available and at will), and much more.
    36. How many generations before them (the Makkans), mightier than them in assault, did We cause to perish! They wandered aimlessly about (in quest of a means of escaping death), but is there any evasion? 
    37. Indeed, in this narrative there is a reminder for him whose heart has believed and has witnessed the grounds for belief tending to prove the conclusion.
    38. We created the heavens and the earth and all that lies in between in six days, and never were We touched with fatigue.
    39. Therefore, be patient, Muhammad, in response to what they say. Praise the glory of your Lord and extol His glorious attributes before sunrise and before sunset. 
    40. And at some part of the night, and after the conclusion of prostrating yourself in the act of worship.
    41. And listen to what the caller will call on the Resurrection Day from a near place. 
    42. This is the Day on which all will hear the Shout with the Truth.
    43. We who give life and cause death, and to Us alone will be the Destiny.
    44. This is the day the earth from above the dead will crack (and they will then emerge from the graves rushing to their fate), and nothing is easier than to muster the resurrected to judgment.
    45. We know best all the disbelievers say about your message. And you, Muhammad, never forced them to follow you or your admonition, nor were you a potentate over them (but you are a witness and warning). So, keep reminding with the Qur’an the believer who fears the Threat.


