SURAH 51
ATH-THARIYAT
The Wind and What It Distributes over the Universe
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with Allah’s asseveration of the truth of the Day of Judgment and requital, followed by an asseveration of the confusion that overwhelmed the disbelievers regarding the falsehood they relate to the Prophet and the Ever-Glorious Qur’an. It warns the disbelievers of the heinous end that awaits them in the Hereafter and depicts the reward Allah has prepared for those who revere Him for the righteous deeds they did in this life. Then it directs people to reflect on Allah’s signs in the universe and in themselves, and on the marvelous creation and the wonders of innovation He deposited in them.
    And it mentions the story of Ibrahim (Abraham) with his angel guests. It narrates some aspects of the status of previous nations and the destruction that befell them for their disbelief in their messengers. It points out, in brief, some signs in the cosmos, and urges people to repent and return to Allah’s cause and worship Him alone, for worshiping Him is the main objective of creating mankind and jinn. Then the surah ends with warning those who disbelieved Allah’s Messenger of an affliction similar to that which befell the nations before them.
   
    1. Allah gives a solemn declaration by (the winds) that scatter (dust). 
    2. And by (the clouds) bearing heavy weights.
    3. And by the vessels floating on water propelled by the wind on the sails (by Allah’s Will). 
    4. And by the dividers (the angels) who apportion Allah’s provisions to mankind and all other beings, and apportion to each what is determined by the Command of Allah.
    5. That all that you are promised (of resurrection and other matters) is true.
    6. And that the Recompense is sure to happen.
    7. By the heaven with its delineated and well-deigned paths, 
    8. You people are, indeed, at variance in your statements and beliefs.
    9. And no one is diverged from this true promise except those diverged (by the Command).
    10. Denunciated, then, are those who suspect the resurrection is a falsehood. 
    11. (Those who are) immersed in perplexity and are unmindful.
    12. Those who ask, “When will that Day of Judgment fall?”
    13. The day when they will be tried over the Fire.
    14. And there and then, they will be told, “Taste your trial. This is what you always asked to be hastened.”
    15. But the pious will be in Gardens (of indescribable unsurpassed beauty) ornamented with beautiful springs.
    16. Satisfied with the blessings and honor Allah their Lord has brought them, they were charitable in life.
    17. They only slumbered a little at night. 
    18. And before dawn, they beseeched Allah’s forgiveness (for their errors and their iniquities).
    19. And a truthfully determinate share of their properties was apportioned to distribute among the needy who requested aid and among those who did not request aid.
    20. On earth are countless signs that are clearly recognized by those having certitude.
    21. And (clearly demonstrated) signs within yourselves; do you not see?
    22. And in heaven rest your livelihood (and the means of sustaining life) and all that you have been promised.
    23. And so, by the Lord of the heavens and the earth, all that has been promised (resurrection, requital, punishment of the deniers, and reward of the pious) is as true as you pronounce (in words).
    24. Have you heard, Muhammad, of the discourse of the honorable guests of Ibrahim (Abraham)? 
    25. They entered his presence and greeted him with the expression of good will, “Peace,” and he met them with the words of welcome, “Peace, people unknown to me.”
    26. He quickly went to his household, then he came back with a fatted calf. 
    27. He set it before them (but when they did not eat of it), he said, “Would you not eat!”
    28. He entertained a fright from them, but they said, “Do not be afraid.” And they gave him glad tidings of a knowledgeable youth. 
    29. His wife came forward and she cried out. She hit her face and said, “An old woman who lived sterile all her life!”
    30. They said, “Thus says Allah your Lord. It is He Who is, indeed, The All-Wise, The All-Knower.”
    31. “And now, messengers,” said Ibrahim to his guests, “What is the concern of your visit?”
    32. They said, “We have been sent to a criminal people,
    33. To send (with impetuous violence) stones of clay against them. 
    34. Marked in the Reckoning of your Lord for the extravagant. 
    35. We brought out the believers who were in it.
    36. But We did not find more than one single household who were Muslims.
    37. We left therein a sign to those who fear the painful torment.
    38. And there is another sign in Musa (Moses), whom We sent to Pharaoh (supported) with great authority.
    39. But Pharaoh turned away with his supporters and said, “A sorcerer or a madman.”
    40. And so We took him and his hosts, and We flung them into the sea; and this was on account of his blameworthy disbelief.
    41. And in the case of the people of `Ad, We sent against them a terrifying and sterile wind.
    42. It spared nothing without leaving it as rotten decay.
    43. And another sign was demonstrated in the case of the people of Thamud. They were told, “Enjoy yourselves for a while.” 
    44. But they insolently defied the Command of Allah their Lord and were destroyed by a stunning thunder while they were looking on.
    45. And so they could not stand up, nor were they able to protect or vindicate themselves.
    46. And similarly (We struck a blow at) the people of Nuh (Noah) before them; they were, indeed, an immoral people.
    47. And We constructed the heaven powerfully, and authoritatively and We are extending wide.
    48. And the earth We laid it out as a bedding. So, how Excellent are the Spreaders!
    49. And We created everything of pairs that you may remember (and believe in Our omnipotence).
    50. Therefore, flee to Allah (and obey Him). I am an evident warner from Him to you. 
    51. And do not set up with Allah another god. I am an evident warner from Him to you.
    52. No messenger came to a people before your people but they said, “A sorcerer or a madman.”
    53. Is this the legacy of thought they have passed on from one generation to another? But they are indeed an inordinate people.
    54. Therefore, keep away from them, Muhammad. You are not blameworthy. 
    55. But keep reminding people (of their duty to Allah), for reminding profits the believers.
    56. I have not created the jinn and mankind except to worship Me.
    57. No livelihood or maintenance do I require from them, nor do I expect them to feed Me.
    58. For, indeed, Allah is The all-Provider, The Owner of Power, The all-Pervading.
    59. Indeed, those who exercised injustice must expect the fatal allotment like the allotment of their companions of the nations before them, and so they had better not ask it to be hastened on.
    60. And how woeful to the ones who disbelieved will be their day that they have been promised.


