SURAH 52
AT-TUR
The Mount
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah starts by solemnly declaring by five of the greatest creations that deniers will be punished, and it asserts that punishment will afflict them in different ways on the Day of Resurrection. Then it mentions the blessings, bounties, and honor that will be conferred on the pious in the Garden, and the grace conferred on their progenies by joining them in their high ranks. Then Allah enjoins the Prophet to keep reminding people without giving the least attention to the falsehood that the disbelievers ascribe to him or to the Qur’an, and it points to their failure to emulate it. It also refutes many of their corrupt thoughts with the aim of showing their perversion and misestimation. Then it ends with commanding the Prophet to leave them till they face the Day when they are suddenly taken by an overwhelming punishment that strikes them at the roots, and to remain patient regarding Allah’s decision to respite them. No harm will afflict him, as Allah keeps an eye on him and holds him in great esteem. The surah calls upon him to praise Allah and extol His glory all the time when he gets on his feet and at night when the stars decline.
  
    1. Allah swears by the mount (where He spoke to Musa (Moses). 
    2. By a Book inscribed
    3. In a parchment spread.
    4. And by the Home always frequented.
    5. And by the roof upraised (the heaven).
    6. And by the sea seething.
    7. That your Lord’s torment is indeed befalling.
    8. No one can repel it.
    9. A day will come when the heaven whirls an awful whirling.
    10. And the mountains travel with (an awful) traveling.
    11. There and then, woe to the beliers on that Day.
    12. Those who play in their vain wading.
    13. This will be the day when they will be repulsed head-long repulsing into the Hell-Fire.
    14. And they will be told, “This is the Fire you had always cried lies to.
    15. “And is this Fire you are watching nothing but sorcery? Or is it that you do not see?
    16. “Enter it and roast in it. And whether you bear it patiently or impatiently, you face today the recompense of what you were doing (in life below).”
    17. Whereas those who are pious to Allah will take abode in indescribable Gardens of bliss.
    18. Exhilarating with what Allah their Lord has conferred on them and jubilant that He has saved them from torment in the pit of Hellfire.
    19. And they will be told, “Eat and drink and enjoy all that affords wholesome pleasure in return for the deeds you have done.”
    20. Sitting and reclining on lounges ranked in rows, and We will wed them to wide-eyed huris.
    21. And those who have believed, and their progeny walked after them accepting their authority and example in belief, will still be fitted for companionship together without withholding the reward of their deeds, since every person will be pledged for his deeds.
    22. We will provide them with delicious fruits and meat of their craving.
    23. They will be contending a drink that gives a feeling of bliss, and never does it induce them into idle talk, nor is there room for vice.
    24. They will be served by handsome boy attendants who are ready to serve them. They, in their clear white appearance, look like precious pearls. 
    25. And some of them come forward to others asking (about the great grace they have received).
    26. Before obtaining this grace, they said, “We lived among our own families timorous (of Allah’s torment). 
    27. But how bounteous has Allah been to us! He extended His mercy to us and did not render us liable to the torment in the pestilential flames of Hell.
    28. “We always invoked Him in life; it is He Who is The Most Benign, The Ever-Merciful.”
    29. Therefore, Muhammad, keep reminding people of their duty to Allah. You are not, through your Lord's Favor, a soothsayer or a madman.
    30. Or do they say, “He is a poet, and we will keep him in view until the encounter with a calamity or death”? 
    31. Say to them, “I will be waiting with you (to witness the end of my call and your denial).” 
    32. Or do their immature understanding command them to utter these sayings? Or are they an inordinate people?
    33. Or do they say that Muhammad has forged this Qur’an? No, indeed, they do not believe.
    
    34. Let them, then, produce an informative discourse (similar to the Qur’an), if they are saying the truth.
    35. Or have they been created out of nothing, or are they the creators?
    36. Or was it they who created the heavens and the earth? Indeed, they have no certitude.
    37. Or are they in possession of your Creator’s (Lord's) treasuries, or are they dominators (who run the universe)?
    38. Or do they have a ladder to ascend to gather information upon listening? If so, then let their attentive listener furnish the evident authority.
    39. Or is it that to Allah belong only daughters, and to you belong only sons (whom you love)?
    40. Or do you ask of them for a reward (for the divine message you deliver to them), that they have been burdened with heavy fines?
    41. Or do they have the Unseen, and they write it?
    42. Or do they only mean to plot against you? But those who disbelieve are the plotted against.
    43. Or have they another god other than Allah? Far Exalted is He above all those they associate with Him!
    44. And if they see a dark lump (sometimes devastating) falling from the sky, they would label it as accumulated clouds.
    45. Therefore, leave them until they are faced with their (Settling) Day, when they will be stunned.
    46. A Day on which none of their plots will avail them or offer them vindication.
    47. And besides that, there will be a punitive torment that hits the unjust wrongdoers in life, but most of them do not know.
    48. Be patient and bear with Allah’s Judgment. We keep you under Our Eyes. And extol your Lord's Praise when you get up from sleep.
    49. And extol His glorious attributes some part of the night and when the stars make a descent.


