SURAH 53
AN-NAJM
The Star
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The solemn declaration given at the beginning of this surah assures the authenticity of the revelation Muhammad receives. He has in no way erred and in no way is he misguided. And it assures the truthfulness of his night journey to the heavens, where his sight never swerved nor was inordinate. Then the surah talks about the trifling mentality that led the disbelievers to worship the idols that they made by their own hands and named by themselves. And they conceived the angels as females and assigned them to Allah; whereas they assigned the males to themselves. Then the surah advises the Messenger to pay no regard to them and to leave their end to be decided by Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth Who will requite the wrongdoers and the righteous in proportion to their deeds, Who knows the phases of His creation and their status. Then it denounces those who deny requital, which was acknowledged by all preceding divine messages and especially the scrolls of Ibrahim (Abraham) and Musa (Moses). The verses assured all these meanings through demonstrating the exponents of Allah’s omnipotence and the signs He revealed to the previous nations. Then the surah ends with assuring that the Qur’an is a warning among the warnings presented to the past nations to caution them of the Day of Judgment. It blames the disbelievers for disregarding the Qur’an and laughing instead of shedding tears when listening to it. Finally, it commands the believers to prostrate themselves and worship Allah Who revealed the Qur’an.
  
    1. I swear by the Star when it tumbles down,
    2. Your companion (Muhammad) did not commit an error nor is he misguided.
    3. Nor does he utter the words of the Qur’an moved by prejudices. 
    4. But the Qur’an he relates to you people is nothing other than Allah’s Revelation revealed to him.
    5. A divine knowledge to mankind, taught to him by a valiant power.
    6. Who is endowed with power and splendor; and so he leveled himself.
    7. When he was on exalted horizon,
    8. Then Jibril (Angel Gabriel) approached and came closer and closer, 
    9. And the distance between him and Muhammad was no more than two bows or even closer.
    10. And Allah revealed to His bondman and Messenger Muhammad whatever was meant to be revealed. 
    11. In no way did (Muhammad's) heart-sight lie about what he saw.
    12. Why, then, do you people wrangle with him about what he saw?
    13. Muhammad saw him (Jibril) descend on another occasion,
    14. At the site designated as Sidrat Al-Muntaha.
    15. Where there is the Garden of the Abode.
    16. When the lote-tree was enveloped with what enveloped it.
    17. Muhammad's sight never swerved, and never became inordinate. 
    18. He saw many of his Lord's (Creator’s) greatest Signs.
    19. Did you Makkans realize that and, consequently, ponder on the idols Al-Lat and Al-`Uzza, 
    20. And the other idol, Manat, third of the group (that you honor and revere)?
    21. Have you chosen the idol (you designated) as male and left to Allah what (you designated) as female?
    22. But this is quite an unreasonable distribution! 
    23. These idols are nothing but names you and your forefathers have invented, names never authorized by Allah. They only follow surmise and what prejudices the selves yearn to, although there came to them from their Lord, Allah, the Truth guiding them to all truth.
    24. Man cannot attain whatever he covets (by the intercession of these idols or others). 
    25. But to Allah belongs everything; the Hereafter and the present world.
    26. A good many angels in the Heaven whose intercession cannot avail any unless Allah permits to whom He wills on behalf of whom He is satisfied with.
    27. Indeed, it is only those who disbelieve in the Hereafter that designate the angels as females.
    28. Yet they lack the knowledge (that supports their allegations), and they only follow surmise. But never does surmise avail anything against the Truth.
    29. Therefore, Muhammad, veer away from those who refuse to acknowledge Our Reminder (the Qur’an) and choose nothing except the life of this world.
    30. For this is their attained knowledge. Allah, your Lord, is He Who knows best those who erred away from His Way, and He knows best those who are guided. 
    31. To Allah belongs all that exists in the heavens and on earth, so that He justly recompenses who have done odious deeds and recompenses those who did fair deeds with the best reward.
    32. Those who avoid the major sins and obscenities. But Allah forgives the small mistakes, faults, or errors (into which they occasionally fall); Allah has Ever-Embracing Forgiveness. He knows well your nature, for it is He Who brought you into being from the earth, then as you were embryos in your mothers’ bellies. Therefore, do not claim yourselves cleansed, for He knows best those who are pious.
    33. Have you seen the one who turned his back to the truth, 
    34. Who gave little money, and yet he stops short and gives grudgingly? 
    35. Does he have knowledge of the Unseen, and therefore he sees the truth?
    36. Has he not been informed of the contents of the Scrolls of Musa (Moses) 
    37. And of Ibrahim (Abraham), who faithfully fulfilled the Message of Allah.
    38. That no self is to bear the encumbrance of another.
    39. And that man will have nothing except what he endeavored to attain.
    40. And that the advantages of his endeavors efforts will be seen.
    41. Then he will be recompensed for his deeds with the fullest recompense.
    42. And that to Allah, your Lord, alone is the final end.
    43. And that He makes you laugh and weep.
    44. And that He causes death and gives life. 
    45. And that He created the two sexes of male and female.
    46. From a sperm-drop (nutfa) when it is emitted. 
    47. And that He will effect the second engendering (when He restores the dead to life for judgment on the Last Day).
    48. And that He gives riches and property.  
    49. And that He is the Lord of Sirius (the chief of the constellation Canis Major).
    50. And that He caused to perish the first people of `Ad, the people of Hud. 
    51. And likewise He caused to perish the people of Thamud, the people of Salih, and spared none of them.
    52. And before them He caused to perish the people of Nuh (Noah), who were more unjust and more inordinate.
    53. And He brought to ruin the overthrown cities of Falsehood, Sodom and Jomorrah (Lut's people). 
    54. So that they were enveloped with punitive punishment (torment with stones). 
    55. Therefore, which of your Lord's boons do you wrangle about?
    56. This Qur’an is a warning of a like kind to the earlier warnings.
    57. The inevitable Day of Judgment is imminent.
    58. No one apart from Allah can lift it off.
    59. Do you wonder at this discourse? 
    60. And you laugh (to scorn) and do you not weep, 
    61. While you amuse yourselves?
    62. Then prostrate yourselves to Allah and worship Him*.
* A prostration should be performed here.




