SURAH 54
AL-QAMAR
The Moon
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    The surah opens by drawing people’s attention to the fact that the Day of Judgment is approaching and warns them of it. The following verses clarify the attitude of the disbelievers towards the miracles that demonstrate their insistence on disbelief. The verses ask the Prophet to disregard the disbelievers and respite them to a Day when they will come out from their graves as if they were locusts spread abroad. Then the surah demonstrates some aspects of the past nations with their Messengers and the punishment that afflicted them. While moving from one story to another, the verses draw attention to the fact that the Qur’an is made easy for anyone who seeks admonition and recollection. The surah concludes that the disbelievers of Makkah were not more powerful than the nations who came before them, and that they are neither secure nor safe from punishment. Then the surah ends with threatening the disbelievers with a Day when they will be dragged on their faces into Hellfire and told, “Taste the touch of the scorching fire that you denied.” It also gives glad tidings to the pious of their abode in Paradise with its rivers, in secure seats in the providence of Allah The Supreme Determiner.
 
    1. The final hour, (the Day of Judgment), is drawing near and the moon is cleft asunder.
    2. Yet whenever they see a sign, they veer away and say that it is nothing but continuous sorcery.
    3. They cried lies, and they followed their own prejudices. But every Command is settled (through blessing or torment).
    4. In fact, the disbelievers have received news (in the Qur’an) wherein there is scaring warning.
    5. They received consummate wisdom. But in no way do warnings avail!
    6. Turn away from those disbelievers, Muhammad. There will come the Day when the announcer (among the angels) announces to them the maleficent painful and disturbing news.
    7. With submissive eyes, they come out of the graves as if they were locusts spread abroad. 
    8. With protruding heads, hastening to the Caller, the disbelievers saying, “This is indeed going to be a distressful day.”
    9. Before these disbelievers of Makkah, the people of Nuh (Noah) cried lies to Our bondman and said, “He is a madman!” (and they barred him from conveying Our message by) terrifying and scaring him.
    10. Nuh supplicated Allah for His aid. “My Lord,” he said, “thus far I have been overcome, My Lord. So, vindicate (me).”
    11. We opened the gates of heaven and poured down copious, impetuous torrential rain. 
    12. And We made the earth break forth suddenly and made water rush violently and copiously, forcing springs, and the two waters met for a Command foreordained.
    13. And We carried Nuh in an ark constructed with planks and caulk.
    14. Running under Our eyes, a recompense for him who was disbelieved.
    15. And We left the drowning of the disbelievers as a sign (serving to demonstrate divine power and omnipotence). And so, is there any who will recollect?
    16. And how effective was My torment and My warnings (to the disobedient)! 
    17. We made the Qur’an easy to remember (and a guide to the path of righteousness). And so, is there any who will recollect?
    18. The people of `Ad cried lies to their messenger, Hud. And how effective was My torment and My warnings (to the disobedient)! 
    19. We drove against them a most clamorous wind in a day of continuous calamity.
    20. Plucking up mankind as if they were up-rooted palm-trees.
    21. And how effective was My torment and My warnings (to the disobedient)! 
    22. We made the Qur’an easy to remember (and a guide to the path of righteousness). And so, is there any who will recollect?
    23. The people of Thamud cried lies to the warnings (of their messenger, Salih). 
    24. They said, “Should we follow one mortal? We would, indeed, be at error and the blazes of insanity. 
    25. “Has the Remembrance been cast upon him from among us? Indeed he is an insolent liar.”
    26. But soon enough, will they know who the insolent liar is!
    27. We are sending the she-camel (as a sign to Salih) and a temptation to them (to prove their wickedness). And watch them, and have patience (till Allah decides their end).
    28. And tell them that water is to be distributed among their number (including the she-camel), and that each share falls to each in turn.
    29. They called upon their companion, who (held the knife and) crippled the she-camel by cutting its hamstrings.
    30. So, how effective was My torment and My warnings (to the disobedient)! 
    31. We sent one direful shout against them that made them like the bristly stubble of grain stalks that are collected by a fold-builder. 
    32. We made the Qur’an easy to remember (and a guide to the path of righteousness). And so, is there any who will recollect?
    33. Similarly did the people of Lut (Lot); they cried lies to the warnings. 
    34. We directed a brimstone-charged storm toward them (to annihilate them), except Lut’s House, whom We delivered in the latter part of the night just before dawn.
    35. A Favor from Our Providence as a recompense to the thankful. 
    36. Lut, earlier, had sincerely warned them of our merciless assault, but they wrangled about the warnings.
    37. Lut’s people solicited of him his guests (to surrender to their evil sin), but We obliterated their eyes. So rebuke them thus, “This day you will taste My merciless but just torment and My warning.”
    38. And in the early morning We made an abiding torment.
    39. So, they tasted My torment and warnings.
    40. We made the Qur’an easy to remember (and a guide to the path of righteousness). And so, is there any who will recollect?
    41. Also, the house of Pharaoh received their (successive) warnings.
    42. And they cried lies to all Our signs. And so We seized them with the Zeisure of The All-Mighty, The All-Determiner.
    43. Are you disbelievers more charitable than those who came before you (who were destroyed)? Or do you pagans have acquittal in the Zubur (sacred Books that you are granted immunity from punishment)?
    44. Or do the disbelievers say, “We all together will overcome (any adversity and to triumph over misfortune)!”
    45. This large host of pagans will be put to rout and will turn their backs.
    46. Further, there awaits them the foreordained unfortunate Hour (when they come to judgment). And indeed more calamitous and more bitter.
    47. The wicked criminals among these and those are in error and insanity.
    48. There will come the day when they are dragged on their faces in the Fire and will be told, “Now, feel the unbearable sensation of Scorching Fire.”
    49. It is We Who created everything according to a determined Estimate. 
    50. Thus, Our Command is but one as the twinkling of an eye.
    51. We made your ancestors and the people of your sects to perish. And so, is there any who will recollect?
    52. And everything they did is set down in the Zubur (Records)
    53. Also everything, small or great, is inscribed.
    54. The pious will be in Gardens and Rivers.
    55. In a seat of Sincerity in the Providence of The Ever-Determining King.



