SURAH 55
AR-RAHMAN
The All-Merciful (The Unique Attribute of Allah)
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah mentions Allah’s bounties and favors. It begins with mentioning Allah, The All-Merciful, then His most honorable bounty, that of teaching man the Ever-Glorious Qur’an. Then the verses mention and present Allah’s bounties in a way that shows how Glorious and Graceful Allah is. The surah focuses on demonstrating His omnipotence and authority over both mankind and jinn in the heavens and on earth. It also mentions the punishment of the disbelievers in Hellfire, and expounds on the grace and bounties the pious will enjoy in Paradise. The surah ends with extolling Allah and praising His glorious attributes.
    The verse “Therefore, which of your Lord’s favors will you mankind and jinn cry lies to?” is repeated thirty-one times in accordance with the Qur’anic style in which each repetition fits the context of situation; each repetition rebukes the disbelievers for their denial of Allah’s favor mentioned in the preceding verse.
  
    1. The All-Merciful 
    2. He has taught the Qur’an.
    3. He created man 
    4. And taught him distinct speech. 
    5. The courses of the sun and the moon were determined according to (precise and infallible) computation.
    6. And the stars and the trees prostrate (to divine omnipotence).
    7. And He raised the heavens aloft, and He set the Balance 
    8. So that you do not go beyond the prescribed balance. 
    9. So, observe the weight with equity, and do not be induced to cause loss with the balance.
    10. And He laid the earth for all beings. 
    11. In it grow a large variety of fruits and date palms with large bracts and sheathing leaves.
    12. And grain with husk as a provision and the fragrance of herbs.
    13. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    14. He created man from claylike earthenware. 
    15. And He created the jinn from a merged flame of fire.
    16. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you cry lies to? 
    17. He is the Lord of the two eastern points (where the sun rises in winter and summer) and the two western points (where the sun sets in winter and summer).
    18. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you cry lies to? 
    19. Allah merged the two seas and made them come into contact. 
    20. And He set up an immaterial isthmus between them so that neither of them transgresses on the other.
    21. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    22. And out of the waters come delightful gems of pearls and coral, which you use as ornaments. 
    23. Therefore, which of your Lord’s favors will you mankind and jinn deny? 
    24. To Him belong the ships that sail in the sea like bulwarks.
    25. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    26. All that is on earth will vanish. 
    27. And there remains only the Face of your Lord, The Owner of Majesty and Magnificence. 
    28. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    29. All created beings in the heavens and on earth address to Him their needs. Every day He is upon some (momentous) affair. 
    30. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    31. Soon will We attend to your disputes (and judge between you), you overburdened mankind and jinn.
    32. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    33. You company of the jinn and mankind, if you are able to penetrate the region of the heavens and the earth; you will not be able to penetrate without Allah’s ordinance and authority.
    34. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    35. Against you will be sent flares of fire and molten brass and you will not vindicate yourselves. 
    36. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    37. Then when the heaven is cloven asunder and becomes a rosy molten mass.
    38. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    39. On that Day no man or jinn will be asked about his guilty deeds.
    40. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    41. There and then the criminals will be marked by a special mark. And so each of them will be seized by the forelocks and the feet (to be cast into Hell).
    42. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    43. They will be rebuked, “This is the Hell that the criminals among you always cried lies to.” 
    44. They will be made to go back and forth between it and the scalding infernal boilers.
    45. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    46. As for him who fears the station of Allah, his Lord, there will be two (destined) Gardens.
    47. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    48. Adorned with variegated branches (springing out of beautiful trees).
    49. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    50. There will be two springs running.
    51. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    52. And all fruit of two different pairs.
    53. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    54. The fortunate will be reclining upon furnishings lined, and enjoying the fruits within easy reach.
    55. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    56. In it are maidens restraining their glances, whom no man or jinn has ever touched (deflowered).
    57. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    58. Representing the (precious stones of) ruby and coral.
    59. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    60. Is there a reward for fairness other than fairness in reward?
    61. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    62. And lesser than the two previous Gardens, are other two Gardens.
    63. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    64. Gardens with greenery deep in shade.
    65. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    66. With two fountains containing flowing spurting springs.
    67. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    68. Yielding fruits and date palms and pomegranates.
    69. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    70. Within, there are charitable and fair maidens.
    71. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    72. Huris with eyes radiating splendor cloistered in pearly tent-like pavilions.
    73. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    74. Virgins in a state of inviolate chastity, whom no man or jinn has ever deflowered.
    75. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    76. Reclining on green cushions in chambers exquisitely carpeted.
    77. Therefore, which of your Lord’s boons will you mankind and jinn cry lies to? 
    78. Blessed is the Name of your Lord, The Owner of Majesty and Magnificence.

