SURAH 56
AL-WAQI`AH
The Event
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with a description of some of the inevitable horrific events on the Day the world comes to an end and says that people will be classified on this day into three groups. It gives a detailed account of the blessings or punishments that are commensurate with their deeds. Then it presents the exponents of Allah’s grace and bounties, and the signs of His omnipotence in creation, plants, water, and fire, and asserts that these signs ought to impel all creation to extol Allah and highly praise Him. The verses of this surah give a solemn declaration on the highly elevated position of the Qur’an and the praise it deserves, and blames the disbelievers for their bad deeds, as they denied Allah rather than praising and extolling Him. Then it gives a brief depiction of the previously detailed description of the three groups and the end (good or bad) that awaits each group. Then the surah ends with asserting that all that it mentions is the absolute truth and undoubted facts. It concludes that all these realities logically lead to extolling and praising Allah.

    1. When the event befalls,
    2. There is no lying to its befalling.
    3. Lowering (the criminals), raising (the righteous).
    4. When the earth is convulsed with a severe convulsion, 
    5. And the mountains are crumbled a violent crumbling.
    6. So, they are disseminated dust particles.
    7. There and then, you people will fall into one of three orders, each occupying the position according to his merit.
    8. The (dwellers of the majestic abode are the) companions of the right; how magnificent their abode is! 
    9. And the dwellers of the sinister abode are the companions of the left; how sinister their abode is!
    10. And those who surpass in good deeds in life below (are the ones who surpass (others) to high ranks in the Hereafter). 
    11. These are the nearest to Allah’s special blessedness, 
    12. And they will be welcomed by Him into Gardens of Bliss.
    13. These favorites are a throng of the earliest (together with their prophets),
    14. And a few of the latest (a lesser number of Muhammad’s followers).
    15. They will be seated on close-wrought with gold (and adorned with pearls).
    16. They recline thereon facing each other.
    17. They will be served by handsome immortal young men.
    18. They go round carrying cups, beakers and goblets to serve a drink from a profuse spring.
    19. A drink that causes no headache, nor does it exhaust or intoxicate.
    20. And they will be served with the fruits of their choice.
    21. And with the flesh of the fowls and birds that they choose.
    22. They will be accompanied by Huris whose eyes are majestically wide, 
    23. Like nestled pearls.
    24. This is the reward for their meritorious deeds.
    25. They will hear there no idle talk, nor any sinful speech.
    26. But only “Peace, peace be upon you” (a greeting they address to each other).
    27. And the companions of the Right. No one knows the rewards Allah has prepared for the companions of the right.
    28. Dwelling in a landscape of thornless lote-trees. 
    29. And banana tress with fruit heaped over each other. 
    30. And shade extending everywhere.
    31. Fountainheads from which water streams.
    32. And fruit plentiful. 
    33. Never will it be scarce nor will it be forbidden. 
    34. And raised furnishings.
    35. And companions whom We brought up anew. 
    36. We made them virgins, 
    37. Chastely amorous and almost of the same age. 
    38. We have prepared them for those disposed on the right.
    39. The companions of the right include a throng of those who preceded,
    40. And also a throng of the later (Muhammad’s followers).
    41. No one knows the punishment awaiting the companions of the left will be. 
    42. They will be exposed to a very strong and lasting hot blast surrounding them and will drink boiling water. 
    43. And a shade of Smoking Blaze,
    44. Nor cool, nor refreshing.
    45. They were extravagant in their life of ease and luxury.
    46. They always insisted on adhering to their own monstrous vileness.
    47. They always said, “How can we be raised after death when we have been reduced to dust and bones?
    48. “Will we resurrected together with our forefathers?”
    49. Say to them, Muhammad, refuting their denial, “The foremost and the latest
    50. Will all be gathered at a certain time on a predestined day.
    51. “And then you erring and beliers, 
    52. “Will be fed on the fruit of the evil tree named Zaqqum, 
    53. “Then you will be filling therewith your bellies.
    54. “Then you will drink superheated scalding water.
    55. “You will be drinking like thirsty camels.”
    56. And in this hospitable punishment they make abode on the Day of Doom.
    57. We created you and brought you into being from a state of nothingness, so why will you not admit the Truth?
    58. Do you see what you ejaculate? 
    59. Do you create it in its different phases (till it becomes a human being) or are We the Creator?
    60. We determined death to fall on you, and We are not outstripped,
    61. That We may transfigure you and shape you into another form unknown to you.
    62. And you already know the first form of creation, so why will you remind yourselves?
    63. Do you see what you till and deposit in the earth?
    64. Do you plant them and make them grow or is it We alone Who make them grow?
    65. If We had willed, We could reduce them to crumbs and leave you regretfully saying,
    66. “We are indeed penalized,
    67. “But we are dispossessed.” 
    68. Do you see the fresh water you drink? 
    69. Do you bring it down from the rainy clouds or do We?
    70. If We had willed, We could render it salty, so why are you not thankful?
    71. Do you see the fire you flare up? 
    72. Is it you who brought its tree into existence or are We Who brought it into existence?
    73. We made it a reminder of (Hellfire) and a material advantage and a commodity for the needy travellers.
    74. And extol the Name of your Magnificent Lord.
    75. I swear by the sites of the stars.
    76. And that is a tremendous oath, if you know. 
    77. That is an honorable Qur’an.
    78. In a Book well-protected.
    79. A Book that is not to be touched except by those purified.
    80. A sending down from the Lord of the worlds.
    81. Why are you dissimulating with this Discourse (Qur’an)?
    82. And make your livelihood that you cry lies to it?
    83. So what about (the moment of the encounter with death) when the self is on its way out and it makes a rattle in the throat, and you are then on the watch for what is expected, 
    84. But unable to avert the inevitable? 
    85. There and then, We are in far closer to the dying than you can possibly perceive or imagine, but you cannot see.
    86. And so, if you are not doomed, 
    87. Why, then, are you unable to restore the self in case you are sincere?
    88. If the dying person is one of those nearest to Allah’s special blessedness,
    89. Then there is for him relief, comfort and a Garden of Bliss.
    90. And if he is among the companions of the right,
    91. Then he will be greeted with “Peace be upon you from the companions of the right.”
    92. But if he is among those who are beliers and the erring,
    93. Then he will make abode in the boiling pot,
    94. Then he will go down in Hell to the pit.
    95. This is but the truth of Certitude.
    96. Therefore, extol the Name of your Magnificent Lord!


