SURAH 57
AL-HADID
Iron   
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts with asserting that all beings in the heavens and on earth praise Allah, extol His glorious attributes, and acknowledge that to Him belong the heavens and the earth. He holds and runs them as He wills. Then it commands people to believe in Allah and to spend in His cause, and it explains that spending in the cause of Allah differs in status according to how necessary and urgent it is. Then it depicts the status of the believers on the Day of Judgment. Their light precedes before and around them. It depicts the hypocrites as they beg the believers to look on them that they may take from their light. But Allah has set up a fence between them with a gate: On the inward side is mercy and on the outward side is torment. Then it urges the believers to submit to the remembrance of Allah and to that which came down of the truth. It describes the abodes of the male and female believers prepared for them by Allah, and the end of the disbelievers in Hellfire. It gives examples showing how trifling life below and all the worldly pleasures it contains are, and how just the Hereafter and the requital are, whether it contains good or bad. It urges people to race to forgiveness from Allah. It also reassures the souls that nothing afflicts any self but it is recorded in a Book in the care of Allah that it may submit to Allah’s predestination. Then it mentions sending the messengers in succession supported with signs and Books and with the means of power and activity, so that they might motivate mankind to implement justice. The surah ends with calling the believers to adhere to piety, and promises them unlimited mercy and Allah’s grace. No one can estimate anything of it, for grace is in the hands of Allah; He brings it to whomever He decides, and Allah is the Owner of the magnificent grace.
    
   
    1. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth extols to Allah. And He is The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.
    2. Only to Him alone belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He determines the course of everything in them by giving life and causing death, and He is The Ever-Determiner over everything.
    3. He is The First and The Last, The Most High (Outward) and The Most Near (Inward). He is beyond and above all. And He is The Ever-Knower of everything.
    4. It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days. Then He leveled Himself on the throne. He has omniscience of all that enters and penetrates the earth, and of all that goes out of it. And He has omniscience of all that comes down from the Heaven and of all that ascends into it. He is with you wherever you are, and He is All-Seer of all that you do.
    5. To Him alone belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and to Him, The Ultimate Authority, are returned to Him.
    6. He inserts the night into the day-time, and inserts the day-time into the night; and He is Ever-Knower of whatever is in the breasts.
    7. Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and spend in benevolence in Allah’s cause of what He put in your possession as successors of each other. Those of you who believe in Allah and spend in benevolence will merit a great reward.
    8. And why would you not have belief in Allah while the Messenger calls upon you to believe in your Lord and your compact was pledged to Him as believers?
    9. It is He Who sends down to His bondman, the Messenger, evident signs to bring you out of darkness into light, and Allah is Ever-Compassionate, Ever-Merciful.
    10. And why should you not spend in the cause of Allah, and Allah is He Who has the heritage of the heavens and the earth. Those of you who spent and fought in the cause of Allah before the conquest of Makkah (where Islam was lacking support and assistance) are a step higher in the scale of dignity, rank, and reward than those who spent and fought thereafter. But to both Allah has promised a fair reward, and Allah is Ever-Cognizant of what you do.
    11. Allah will increase the loan manifold to anyone who would like to lend in benevolence in His cause and he will have an honorable reward! 
    12. One Day, you will see the believers, male and female, with their faces glowing with light proceeding ahead of them and on their right hands. There and then the angels will compliment them with the glad tidings of winning their way to the Garden, beneath which rivers run, where they eternally abide, and this is the tremendous triumph. 
    13. This is the Day when the hypocrites, both men and women, will say to the believers, both men and women, “Would you look at us, so that we adopt of your light?” (But they will be rebuked,) “Go back to where we were granted light and grope for light,” only to find themselves separated from those who are blessed and shut out behind a fence with mercy to those within and torment to those without.
    14. Then the hypocrites will call out to those who are believers and say to them, “Have we not been together in life below?” “Indeed, (we were together as you say,)” say the believers. “But you tempted yourselves, and you awaited that calamities would afflict us, and you were suspicious and fancies deluded you till the Command of Allah came. And the Deluder deluded you about Allah. 
    15. “And so now, and on this Day, no ransom can be accepted from you hypocrites nor from those who disbelieved. (You all will be gathered in Hell,) and Hell is the place where you make abode, it is your patron; and how miserable is the destination!”
    16. Is it not time that those who believe submit to the remembrance of Allah and to what has been sent down of the Truth (the Qur’an)? They should not be like those (of the Jews and Christians), who have been given the Book before them, and the term for whom became long, and they have become hardhearted. Indeed, many among them are immoral (not in conformity with the principles of their religion). 
    17. You believers must know that Allah revives the earth (and makes it ready for plantation) after it has suffered death. We have made evident for you (Our) Signs so that you would consider. 
    18. The benevolent, men and women, who have lent Allah all they could of fair loans (and pious deeds), will be increased manifold for them, and will have an honorable reward.
    19. And those who believe in Allah and His messengers are among the most sincere. The martyrs in the Providence of their Lord will have their reward and light on the Day of Judgment. But those who disbelieved and cried lies to Our Signs will be the companions of the Hellfire. 
    20. You who are deceived by life below had better know that life here is but playing, diversion, adornment, and boastfulness and multiplying of riches and children. It is like succoring rain whose growth looks wonderful to the disbelievers. Then it heaves, so it turns yellow, and it becomes crushed. In the Hereafter, there is a severe torment (for those who preferred life below to the Hereafter). But there are also forgiveness and satisfaction (for those who preferred the Hereafter to the life below). And life here is but the enjoyment of delusion. 
    21. Race with one another for your Lord's (Allah’s) forgiveness and your way to the beatitude of a Garden as wide as the heaven and the earth prepared for those who sincerely believed in Allah and His messengers. This is the (sufficient) Grace of Allah. He confers it on whom He wills, and Allah is the Owner of magnificent Grace.
    22. No affliction (or calamity) in the earth or in yourselves but it has been predestined and committed to writing in a Book long before We make it come to pass, and how easy it is for Allah to bring it to effect!
    23. We thus informed you so that you may not feel sad for what eluded you, nor exult over the favors, for Allah does not love anyone conceited and boastful. 
    24. They are those who are miserly, and they induce mankind to be miserly. And he who turns away from the ordinances of Allah (must realize) that Allah is Ever-Rich and Ever-Worthy of all praise.
    25. We have sent Our Messengers with clear evidences, and have sent down with them the Book and the Balance (of justice) so that mankind may keep up equity. And We sent down iron wherein there is mighty violence advantages for mankind. Allah will know those who intend to vindicate Him and strive in His cause and to support His Messengers in the Unseen. Allah is indeed All-Powerful and All-Mighty.
    26. We sent Nuh (Noah) and Ibrahim (Abraham) and We kept the prophethood and the Book in their offspring. Among their offspring are those who are guided, and many of them are immoral.
    27. Then in sequence We sent after them others of Our messengers and in order of succession We sent `Isa (Jesus) the son of Maryam (Mary), and We gave him the Injil (the Book revealed to `Isa). And We impressed the hearts of those who followed him with compassion and mercy, but they innovated monasticism, which We never prescribed on them. (They were expected to please Allah with the profound reverence due to Him.) Yet they never observed it the right observation. And so, We gave those of them who believed their reward they merited. Many among them are immoral.
    28. O you who believe, be pious to Allah and believe in His Messenger, for then He will extend to you a double portion of His mercy, and He will give you a light guiding you to the path of righteousness and forgive your sins, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    29. (Allah grants you all of that) so that the People of the Book (who did not believe in Muhammad) would know that they cannot obtain anything of the grace of Allah (for themselves or for others), for all the grace rests in the Hand of Allah. He confers it on whom He wills, and Allah is the Owner of Magnificent Grace.


