SURAH 58
AL-MUJADALAH
Series of Statements to Establish a Rule
Revealed at Madinah
  In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful. 
    This surah starts with the story of the woman whose husband told her that she is to him as his mother’s back, and then it expounds the ordinance for this incident. In this surah, Allah condemns in more than one verse those who oppose the religion He ordained and warns them not to confer in private for vice and hostility. The surah guides the believers to the good manners of private conference among themselves and between them and the Prophet. It rebukes the hypocrites for being loyal to the disbelievers and describes them as the party of Satan, who are the losers. The surah ends by elucidating the attributes that the believers should entertain: preferring the satisfaction of Allah and His Prophet to the satisfaction of anyone else, even if they are their parents, children, brothers, or kinsmen. The surah describes them as the party of Allah, who are the prosperous.
 
    1. Allah has heard the argument of the woman who disputed with you about her husband (as having wronged her) and she complains to Allah. Allah hears the series of arguments by both of you. Allah is All-Hearer and All-Seer. 
    2. Those of you believers who use the phrase “mother’s back” (as a symbol of making their wives like their mothers to them) are wrong. They must know that their wives are not their mothers; their mothers are those who gave birth to them. They express what is, indeed maleficent and a forgery. But Allah is Oft-Pardoning and Oft-Forgiving.
    3. And those of you who have used this phrase “mother’s back” in dissolving their marriages and now they acknowledge their mistake and wish to resume their marriage ties, incur the liability of freeing a slave before touching their wives. This is an admonition to warn you of such an act, and Allah is All-Cognizant of all that you do.
    4. And he who does not have the means to do so will have to fast two successive months before touching his wife; and if he is unable to fast, he has to feed sixty indigent persons. Allah ordains this to make you believe in Allah and His Messenger. These are the limitations imposed by Allah (which you should never go beyond); and for the disbelievers is a painful torment.
    5. Those who contravene Allah and His Messenger will be suppressed, as were the people like them suppressed before them. We have sent down evident signs, and for the disbelievers is a degrading torment.
    6. One day Allah will resurrect them all and inform them of all that they had done. Allah has enumerated it all and they have forgotten it all. Allah is Witness over all things.
    7. Do you not see that Allah fully knows all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth. There is not an instance of private conference between three persons but He makes their fourth (by His cognizance). Nor among five but He makes their sixth, nor numerically less or numerically more but He is in their presence wherever they might be. Then He will tell them on the Day of Resurrection all they did. Allah is All-Knower of everything. 
    8. Do you not see, Messenger, how those who were forbidden secret conferences—which make the Muslims wonder about them—go back to what they have been forbidden to do? They confer in vice and hostility and disobedience to the Messenger. When they come to you, they greet you with greetings unlike that with which Allah greets you, and they suggest secretly to themselves. Would Allah not torment us for what we say? Hell will be reckoning for them, where they will roast; and miserable is their destiny.
    9. O you who believe (in Allah and His Messenger), if you secretly confer, do not confer in vice and hostility and disobedience to the Messenger, but confer in benignancy and piety. And be pious to Allah, for Whom you will be mustered.
    10. Secret conferences are only from Satan to cause grief to the believers, but he will not harm them without the permission of Allah, and Allah let the believers put their trust.
    11. O you who believe (in Allah and His Messenger), when you are in an assembly and you are requested to move a little to make room for a new comer, move and spread out; Allah will make room for you. And when you are asked to move up, then move up. Allah will raise those who believe and those who are granted knowledge in degrees. And Allah is Ever-Cognizant of whatever you do.
    12. O you who believe (in Allah and His Messenger), when you wish to take conference with the Messenger, let the occasion be preceded by a donation; this is charitable in you and purifies you (to receive Allah’s blessings). But if you do not have the means, Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful. 
    13. How is it that you recoiled, timorous of the acts of charity incumbent on you before you took conference with the Messenger! So you stopped taking private counsel, and Allah relented (and quit you all His debt). But then, you must keep up your prayers and give the poor-due (zakat) and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah is Ever-Cognizant of all that you (do and will requite you accordingly).
    14. Do you, Messenger, not see how (these hypocrites) made as patrons people with whom Allah is angry? They really belong neither to you nor to them, and they take an oath profanely and they know they are lying. 
    15. Allah has prepared for them a severe torment. How odious is whatever they were doing!
    16. They used their oaths as a pretext to protect themselves. Consequently, they have barred from the Way of Allah. There awaits them a degrading torment.
    17. Neither their riches nor their children will avail them anything against Allah. These are the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein they are eternally abiding.
    18. The Day when Allah resurrects them all, then they will appeal to Him swearing, just as they swear now to you, (with an appeal to Allah in confirmation of what they said) and they reckon there is something in it, while, indeed, they are the liars.
    19. Satan overpowered them and made them forget the remembrance of Allah. These are Satan’s party. Indeed, the partisans of Satan are surely the losers. 
    20. Those who challenge and contravene Allah and His Messenger will be the most humiliated.
    21. Allah has decreed, “I, verily, will conquer and overcome, I and My Messengers.” Allah is All-Powerful and All-Mighty.
    22. You will not find a people, who believe in Allah, and the Last Day, who would have intimate affection for those who contravene Allah and His Messenger, although they be their fathers or sons, their brothers or kinsmen. These are people whose hearts Allah has inscribed with the belief, and He has aided them with a Spirit from Him, and will make them enter Gardens, beneath which rivers run, eternally abiding therein. Allah is satisfied with them, and they are satisfied with Him. Those are the party of Allah; verily the party of Allah are the prosperers. 

