SURAH 59
AL-HASHR
The Mustering
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah starts by asserting that all beings that are in the heavens and on earth praise and extol Allah’s glorious attributes. He is The All-Powerful and The All-Mighty, The Wise in all His acts and decrees. Among the signs of His omnipotence is the narrative of the Jewish tribe of Banu An-Nadir, who lived in Madinah. They concluded a treaty with the Prophet, after his immigration to Madinah, that they would neither be on his side nor against him. When the Muslims were defeated at the Battle of Uhud, Banu An-Nadir broke the treaty and sided with the Quraysh against Muhammad, so he surrounded them in their fortresses, which they thought were impregnable, and expelled them from Madinah. Then the surah explains the orders regarding booty, which was gained without fighting or a cavalry charge or otherwise. The booty must be distributed among Allah, His Messenger, the Prophet’s relatives, the poor, the needy, the wayfarer, and the poor Immigrants (Al-Muhajirun) who were driven penniless from their homes. Then the surah speaks about the Supporters (Al-Ansar) and their favors, as they denied themselves what they needed in favor of the Immigrants. It also draws attention to the promises the hypocrites made to Banu An-Nadir—“In case you are driven out, we will definitely go out with you, and in case you are fought against, we will definitely vindicate you”—and shows them to be liars and cheaters. The surah ends by reminding the believers of what they should adhere to: to be pious to Allah, to take all precautions for the near and remote future, and not to be like those who turned their backs to Allah and, consequently, Allah caused them to forget themselves. And finally, it shows how glorious and influential the Qur’an is. It is revealed by Allah; there is no god but Him, and to Him belong the unique attributes. 
 
    1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth extols to Allah. And He is The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.
    2. It is He Who drove those who disbelieved among the population of the Book (the Jews of Banu An-Nadir) out of their homes in Arabia for the first mustering. You Muslims did not think they would leave their homes due to their power, while they thought that their fortresses were a protection from Allah. But Allah came upon them from where they never expected, and He hurled terror in their hearts, so that they ruined their homes by their own hands and the hands of the believers. So, ponder you, who are endowed with sight.
    3. Had it not been that Allah had prescribed their exile from their homes, He would have tormented them in this world. And, moreover, there is yet their torment in the Fire of the Hereafter.
    4. That is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger. And he who opposes Allah, then Allah punishes severely.
    5. You Muslims did not uproot any palm tree or leave it standing on their stems but in accordance with Allah’s permission, so that He brings disgrace to the immoral ones. 
    6. And the booty gained from Banu An-Nadir that Allah has conceded to His Messenger, you Muslims did not get through expedition by your horses or camels. But Allah gives authority to His messengers against whom He wills (without fighting), and Allah is Ever-Determiner over everything.
    7. And whatever spoils Allah has conceded from the population of the towns to the Messenger belong to Allah and to the Messenger, to the kindred and the orphans, and to the indigent and the wayfarer to prevent such gains from making a circuit into the hands of the rich among you. And whatever the Messenger gives you, you must take; and whatever he forbids you to do, you must not do. And be pious to Allah and Allah punishes severely.
    8. Likewise, Allah gives the poor who merit such gains among the Immigrants who were driven out of their homes and lost their riches (in the cause of Allah) in quest of His efficacious Grace and His Satisfaction, vindicating Allah (vindicating His religion) and His Messenger. They are the sincere believers.
    9. And the Supporters who took their location and adopted belief in Madinah before the Immigrants settled there, who love the Muslims who immigrated to them, and never feel want in their breasts for the booty the Immigrants gained, and prefer the Immigrants over themselves even though they were in penury. And whoever is protected from self-avarice are the prosperers. 
    10. Next are those who came after them who say, “Our Lord, forgive us our iniquities and the iniquities of our brothers who preceded us in conforming to the belief, and do not implant in our hearts rancor towards those who believed. Our Lord, You are Ever-Compassionate, Ever-Merciful.”
    11. Did you not see, Muhammad, how the hypocrites repeatedly promised aid to their brothers in disbelief among the People of the Book (Banu An-Nadir), swearing, “If you are driven out of your homes we will go with you, and never will we obey anyone against you; and if you are attacked and fought by Muslims, we will vindicate them.” And Allah is Witness they are liars.
    12. If the Jewish tribe is driven out, the hypocrites will never go with them. And if they are attacked and fought, they will never vindicate them. And if they vindicate them, they will be the first to turn their backs and they will never be vindicated.
    13. You arouse more serious awe in their breasts than Allah; and this is because they are people who do not comprehend.
    14. They will not fight you, except in fortified towns, or from behind walls. They are badly disposed to violence toward each other. You think they are unified, while in reality their hearts are totally diversified. This is because they are a people who do not consider.
    15. Banu An-Nadir are like those disbelievers immediately before them (who tasted the fatal consequences of their disbelief and of breaking their promises). And there is for them a painful torment.
    16. In a like manner Satan said to man, “Disbelieve;” then as soon as man disbelieved, he said, “I am quit of you, I fear Allah, Lord of the worlds.”
    17. The end of Satan and those whom he tempted is that they will be in the Fire, eternally abiding, for this is the recompense of the unjust. 
    18. O you who believe, be pious to Allah, and let every self look for what it has forwarded for the morrow. And be pious to Allah. Surely, Allah is Ever-Cognizant of whatever you do.
    19. And do not be like those who forgot Allah; consequently, Allah makes them forget themselves. Such persons are the immoral.
    20. Never will the inmates of the Fire be equal to the inmates of the Garden. The inmates of the Garden are the prosperers.
    21. If We had sent down this Qur’an to a mountain, you would see it submissive, asundered apart out of apprehension of Allah. We present such parables to mankind that they may meditate. 
    22. He is Allah, there is no god except Him, The All-Knower of the unseen and the witnessed. He is The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    23. He is Allah, the only God there is, The King, The Superb Holy, The Peace (Giver), The Giver of belief, The Hegemonic, The All-Mighty, The Potentate, The Justly Proud. All Extolment be to Allah above what they associate with Him.
    24. He is Allah, The Creator, The Evolver, The Bestower of forms. To Him belong all the Fairest Names. All beings in the heaven and on earth extol His glorious attributes. He is The All-Mighty and The All-Wise.
