SURAH 60
AL-MUMTAHANAH
The Woman Tested
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with instructing the believers not to be on terms of intimacy with the idolaters, who are the enemies of Allah and themselves, as they insist on denying Allah’s message and on driving His Messenger and the Muslims out of their homes in Makkah. The surah points out that the idolaters’ enmity to the Muslims is deep-rooted and seeking a chance to declare itself when they meet the Muslims and overcome them.
    Then the surah shows the good example set by Ibrahim (Abraham) and his companions, who declared themselves clear of the idolaters and the deities they worshiped besides Allah, stressing their enmity to them till they believe in Allah alone. The surah states that this is the attribute of those who are looking forward to meeting Allah and fear His punishment.
    Then it defines those with whom the Muslims are permitted to be on good terms and those they are not. Muslims must be courteous to and treat with tenderness and equity those who did not wage war against their religion or support others in expelling Muslims from their homes. But Allah forbids us to be on good terms with those who waged war against their religion and supported others in driving them out of their homes.
    Then the surah explains the rules pertaining to the Muslim women who immigrated to the Muslim lands, abandoning their idolater husbands, as well as the rule regarding the idolater wives whose husbands abandoned them and immigrated to the Muslim lands.
    Then it mentions the women’s pledge of allegiance, explaining the details of the pledge they give to the Prophet. The surah ends with the same point it opened with, that is, instructing the believers not to be on good terms with the enemies whom Allah cursed, which is stressed throughout the surah.
  
    1. O you who believe (in Allah and His Messenger), do not make as patrons My enemy and yours. You regard them with amity when they have disbelieved in what has come to you of the Truth. They drove the Messenger and you out of their midst for your belief in Allah your Lord. If, indeed, you have gone to war to strive in My cause and to serve and seek My Satisfaction, then do not make a secret friendly intimacy with My enemies! I know well what you conceal and what you avow and disclose openly. Therefore, he among you who does this will have erred away from the level Way.
    2. If they got the better of you, they would be enemies to you, and would stretch to you their hands and tongues with odiousness and they would like you to disbelieve.
    3. Neither your maternal or paternal kin nor your children can profit you. On the Day of Resurrection Allah judges between you and them. And Allah is Ever-Beholder of all that you do.
    4. Indeed, you have in Ibrahim (Abraham) and his followers a fair example. They said to their people, “We are certainly innocent of your ills and of your false gods you worship apart from Allah. We disbelieve in you, and enmity and abhorrence between us will prevail forever until you have believed in Allah alone.” But Ibrahim said to his father, “I will invoke Allah to forgive you, although I do not possess anything for you from Allah.” Therefore, believers, say, “Our Lord, in You we trust, and we turn penitent, and to You is our Destiny.
    5. “Our Lord, do not make us a temptation to the ones who have disbelieved, and forgive us (our iniquities), our Lord. You are The All-Mighty, The Wise.”
    6. Indeed you believers, for those who look forward to Allah and the Last Day, have in Ibrahim and his followers a fair example (in opposing Allah’s enemies). And those who turn away, (must know that) Allah is Ever-Affluent, Ever-Praiseworthy.
    7. Perhaps Allah may make amity between you and those of them whom you took as enemies. He is All-Determiner, All-Forgiving, and Ever-Merciful.
    8. Allah does not forbid you to be benign and equitable towards those who did not fight against your religion or drive you out of your homes. Allah loves those who are equitable.
    9. But He prohibits you (from making intimacy) with those who fought against your religion and drove you out of your homes and backed others in driving you out. And those who make intimacy with them are the unjust ones.
    10. O you who believe, if women come to you immigrating, test them. Allah knows well their belief. If you know that they are believers, do not send them back to the disbelievers. The Muslim women are not lawful to the pagan men, nor are the pagan men any longer legitimate to the Muslim women. But you must pay their pagan husbands the equivalent of what they spent on them (for their dower). There is no fault in you to marry these women if you pay them their due reward. And do not hold back the pagan women (if you have conformed to Islam and they have not). But you may ask for what you spent, and so can pagan men ask for what they spent. This is the Judgment of Allah. He judges between you, and He is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    11. And if a believer’s wife (deserts him and) goes back to the pagans, then when the situation is reversed [a believing wife leaves her pagan husband], you may pay them an equivalent of her dower, and the Muslim husband is to be compensated from the spoils of war. And be pious to Allah, in Whom you believe. 
    12. O Prophet, if immigrating believing women come to you swearing allegiance to you that they will not associate anything with Allah, nor steal, nor commit adultery or infanticide, nor utter calumny, intentionally forging falsehood (nor conceive an illegitimate child and make the husband believe it is his), nor disobey you in beneficent matters, then accept their allegiance and invoke on their behalf Allah’s forgiveness, for Allah is indeed All-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    13. O you who believe (in Allah and His Messenger), do not patronize a people against whom Allah is angry, who have despaired of the Hereafter, just as the disbelievers have despaired that those buried in the graves will be resurrected.


