]SURAH 61
AS-SAFF
The Defensible Array
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with asserting that all that is in the heavens and in the earth praise Allah and extol His glorious attributes, and that it is distasteful to Allah that Muslims say what they do not do, and that Allah likes them to be fully united together. Then it mentions the description related by Musa (Moses) and `Isa (Jesus) of the Children of Isra'il as stubborn and disbelieving, for they strive to extinguish Allah's light, but Allah perfected His light. The surah also declares Allah's promise to grant this religion victory over all other religions, no matter how the disbelievers dislike it. It ends by urging Muslims to strive in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their selves in exchange for forgiveness and Paradise. In addition, He gives them help and a victory that is quite near, and urges the believers to devote themselves to helping Allah's cause, as did the disciples of `Isa son of Maryam (Mary). Indeed, Allah supports the believers and grants them victory. He is The All-Powerful, The All-Wise. 
  
    1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth extols to Allah. And He is The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.
    2. O you who believe, why do you say what you do not perform?
    3. It is utterly detested to Allah that you say what you do not perform.
    4. Allah loves those who fight in His Way in ranks as if they were a compact structure.
    5. Remember, Muhammad, when Musa (Moses) said to his people, “My people, why do you hurt me when you already know I am the Messenger of Allah?” But when they swerved, Allah swerved their hearts. Allah does not guide the immoral people.
    6. And remember when `Isa (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary) said, “O Children of Isra'il, I am the Messenger of Allah confirming what came before me of the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa), and bringing glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me whose name is Ahmad.” But when Ahmad came to them with clear evidences, they said, “This is evident sorcery.”
    7. And who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie against Allah when he is called to Islam? And Allah does not guide the unjust people.
    8. They would like to extinguish the Light of Allah with their mouths; and Allah is perfecting His Light, although the disbelievers hate that.
    9. Allah is the One Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of the Truth, that He may make it predominant over all religion, although this is hateful to the associators.
    10. O you who believe, shall I indicate to you a great trade that will deliver you from a painful torment?
    11. It is that you believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that you strive in the Way of Allah with your money and yourselves. This is most charitable for you if only you knew.
    12. (If you believe and strive in the Way of Allah), He forgives you your guilty deeds and admits you to Gardens beneath which rivers run, and dwellings in the Gardens of `Adn (Eden). This is, indeed, a magnificent triumph.
    13. He gives you another (blessing) you love: victory from Allah and a near conquest. And give, Muhammad, glad tidings to the believers.
    14. O you who believe, be vindicators of Allah, as `Isa, son of Maryam, said to the Disciples, “Who are my vindicators to Allah?” The Disciples said, “We are the vindicators of Allah.” Then a section of the Children of Isra'il believed, and another section disbelieved. So, We aided the ones who believed against their enemy, thus they became uppermost (i.e. victorious).
