
SURAH 62
AL-JUMU`AH
Friday Assembly
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with asserting that everything in the universe glorifies Allah and extols His glorious attributes. Allah favors the illiterate Arabs by sending to them a Prophet from among themselves to teach them the Book and wisdom, and to purify them. This is Allah’s grace, which He confers on whom He wills.
    Allah reproaches the Jews for abandoning the ordinances of the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]), although they know the laws in it, and for claiming that they are the chosen people of Allah to the exclusion of all others. He challenges them to appeal to Allah for the encounter with death if they are truthful. The surah ends by urging the Muslims to hasten to Jumu`ah Prayer (Friday Prayer) when they hear the mu'ththin and to abstain from trading. When the prayer is concluded, then they can disperse and seek the bounty of Providence and keep Allah in mind. Allah reproaches them for letting anything keep them from listening to the admonishment, and He guarantees their provision for them. Allah is the best purveyor to fit every person with his necessities and needs.
 
    1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth extols to Allah, The King, The Superb Holy, The Ever-Mighty, The Ever-Wise.
    2. Allah is He Who has sent to the unlettered Arab community a Messenger from their midst to recite to them His 'ayat (revelations) and to cleanse them, and to teach them the Book and the Wisdom, although they were earlier in evident error. 
    3. He has sent him also to others who have yet to join them (and share with them Heaven’s mercy and grace). And Allah is All-Mighty and All-Wise.
    4. This is the Grace of all Allah. He (munificently and graciously) confers it on whom He wills, and He is The Owner of Magnificent Grace.
    5. Those who were burdened with the Tawrah (the Book revealed to Musa [Moses]) and they did not carry it on, are like a donkey carrying a load of Tomes (full of knowledge). Miserable is the similitude of a people who have cried lies to Allah’s Signs, and Allah does not guide the unjust people.
    6. Say to them, Muhammad, “O you who have Judaized, in case you assert that you are patronized by Allah, apart from mankind, then covet death, if you are sincere.” 
    7. But they will never covet (death) because of what their hands forwarded. And Allah is Ever-Knowing of the unjust. 
    8. Say to them, “The death you try to flee from will meet you; then you will be conveyed back to Him Who knows the Unseen and the Witnessed. Then He will inform you of all that you have done.”
    9. O you who believe, when it is called out for Friday Prayer, endeavor (hastily) to the Remembrance of Allah, and leave out trading. This is more charitable for you if only you know. 
    10 . When the prayer is accomplished, then disperse in the land and seek the Grace of Allah. And remember Allah much, that you may prosper. 
    11. And when they see merchandise for trade or amusement, they break away to it and leave you standing (addressing the divine discourse). Say to them, “What is in the Providence of Allah is more charitable than trade and amusement. And Allah is The Most Charitable of providers.”

