SURAH 63
AL-MUNAFIQUN
The Hypocrites
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah describes the hypocrites. They profess faith while, in fact, in their hearts they are insincere. They swear to protect themselves from being accused of disbelief, which may entail punishment. They have fine bodies that may be admired, and they speak smoothly and with sense so that one cannot help but open the heart to them, but in fact, their hearts are devoid of belief, just as hollow tree trunks are devoid of life. The surah portrays their status when they are summoned to the Prophet to invoke Allah’s forgiveness for them. They turn their heads in contempt and object arrogantly. Then the surah talks about the claim the Jews made that they are noble and that the Muslim immigrants are lowly, and that they (the Jews) will expel the immigrants from Madinah when they return to it. It shows which party was the real noble one. In the end, it addresses the believers to spend in the cause of Allah before any of them encounters death and regrets and wishes that death could be delayed for a while. But Allah will not delay the death of anyone when his time is come.

    1. O Messenger, when the hypocrites come to you they say, “We testify that you are the Messenger of Allah.” And Allah knows well that you are His Messenger. Allah testifies that the hypocrites are liars. 
    2. They use their oaths as a pretext. In consequence, they have barred from the Way of Allah. Odious is whatever they were doing. 
    3. That is because they believed, and thereafter they disbelieved; then their hearts are stamped upon, and in consequence they cannot comprehend. 
    4. When you see them, you admire their figures, and when they speak, you listen; you hear their speech as if they propped up timbers. They reckon every shout is against them. Allah assails them; so, beware of them. How could they be diverged from the path of Truth!
    5. When the hypocrites are told to come to the Messenger to invoke Allah’s mercy and forgiveness for them, they twist their heads, and you see them turning away, waxing proud.
    6. Whether you ask Allah’s forgiveness for them or you do not ask forgiveness, Allah will never forgive them. Surely Allah does not guide the immoral people.
    7. It was they who said to the people of Madinah, “Do not spend (money) on those with Allah’s Messenger until they break away.” But to Allah belongs the treasuries of the heavens and the earth. (He grants them to whom He wills,) but the hypocrites do not comprehend this.
    8. The hypocrites say, “Should we return to Madinah, the ones who are mightier will displace and will drive the humbler ones out of it.” Indeed, all might belongs to Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, but the hypocrites do not comprehend this.
    9. O you who believe (in Allah and His Messenger), let not your wealth or your children divert you from remembering Allah. They who does this are the losers. 
    10. And spend (in benefaction and in benevolence) of what We have provided you before death comes to any of you, then he says, “My Lord, if only You would defer me to a brief term, so that I would give donations and be of the righteous.”
    11. But Allah will not defer the death of any self when his term comes. And Allah is Ever-Cognizant of whatever you do. 
