SURAH 64
AT-TAGHABUN
Day of Judgment
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with asserting that everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah and extols His glorious attributes. Then it mentions some proofs of His omnipotence and omniscience. It draws attention to the disbelievers who came before and disobeyed their Messengers and asserts that they suffered the worst consequences of their actions, as their Messengers brought them the clearest signs and revelations but they denied them. Then it refutes their allegation that they will not be brought back to life after death and advises the people to believe in Allah and His Messenger and the Light, that is, the Qur’an, that was revealed to them. It cautions them of the Day of Assembly when every self will be shown its wrongdoings. Those who believed and imprinted their deeds with piety will enjoy the great pleasures; whereas those who disbelieved will be gathered into Hellfire. The surah also asserts that every calamity that afflicts people is predestined by Allah’s will, and that Allah will grant peace to whoever believes.
    The surah admonishes the people to obey Allah and His Messenger. The Messenger is only responsible for conveying the Message in case the people turn a deaf ear. It also asserts that the believers’ riches and progeny are but a test; therefore, caring for them should not distract them from their duties. Then it commands them to revere Allah as best they can. The surah ends with urging them to spend in the cause of Allah, and reminds them that Allah is Ever-Thankful, Ever-Forbearing, the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, Who requites the people according to their deeds. He is the Ever-Mighty, the Ever-Wise.  
 
    1. Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth extols to Allah. To Him belongs the Kingdom and to Him be the praise, and He is the Ever-Determiner over everything. 
    2. It is He alone Who created you, and then there arose among you the one who is a disbeliever and the other who is a believer. And Allah is Ever-Beholder of what you do.
    3. Allah created the heavens and the earth with the Truth. He fashioned you and made fair your fashioning. And then back to Him is the Destiny. 
    4. He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you keep secret and whatever you make public. And Allah is Ever-Knowing of the inmost (thoughts) in the breasts.
    5. Has there not come up to you the information of those who disbelieved earlier? So, they tasted the pernicious result of their disbelief. And they will have a painful torment.
    6. These events were consequence of their response to their Messengers who brought them the evidences. But they said, “Shall we be guided by mortals?” So, they disbelieved and turned away, and Allah dispensed with them. And Allah is Ever-Affluent, Ever-Praiseworthy. 
    7. The disbelievers assert that they will not be resurrected. Say to them, Muhammad, “Indeed, by my Lord,  you will be resurrected. And you will be informed of all that you had done, and this is indeed easy for Allah.”
    8. You had better believe in Allah, in His Messenger, and in the Light (the Qur’an) that We have sent down. And Allah is Ever-Cognizant of what you do.
    9. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will gather you. This is the Day of the Gathering- that will be the Day of mutual loss and gain (i.e. loss for the disbelievers, as they will enter the Hellfire and gain for the believers as they will enter Paradise). And he who believes in Allah and does righteousness, He will expiate for him his odious deeds, and he will be welcomed into Gardens beneath which rivers run, eternally abiding therein forever, and that is the magnificent triumph!
    10. But those who disbelieved and cried lies to Our Signs will be the inmates of the Fire, eternally abiding therein. And how miserable is the destination!
    11. No affliction befalls anyone but by the permission of Allah. And he who believes in Allah, He will guide his heart. Allah is The All-Knower of all things.
    12. So, obey Allah and obey the Messenger. And if you should turn away, then Our Messenger's duty is only evident proclamation.
    13. Allah, there is no god but Him. So, in Allah let the believers put their trust.
    14. O you who believe, among your wives and your children are some who are an enemy to you, and so beware of them. But if you are clement, and pardon and forgive, Allah will forgive your inequities. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Ever-Merciful. 
    15. Indeed, your wealth and your children are but a temptation. But that Allah has in His Providence a magnificent reward.
    16. Therefore, be pious to Allah as much as you can: listen, obey and expend, that is the most charitable for yourselves. And those who guard against the avarice of their selves are the prosperers.
    17. If you lend to Allah a fair loan, He will increase it manifold for you, and forgive you (your iniquities). And Allah is Ever-Thankful, Ever-Forbearing. 
    18. He is The All-Knower of the Unseen, and the Witnessed. And He is The All-Mighty, The All-Wise.


