SURAH 65
AT-TALAQ
The Divorce
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah mentions some rules regarding divorce and the period of time a divorced woman should wait before remarrying (`iddah), the types of this period, and its rules. Within these rules, according to the way the Qur’an, there is a promise for those who observe Allah’s Commands and a threat to those who transgress. Then the surah refers to the end of those who refuse to submit to the Commandments of Allah and His Messenger. It ends with urging the believers to revere Allah, reminding them of His favor in sending a Messenger to relate and recite Allah’s verses to them with the aim of taking them out of darkness to light, and of His omnipotence manifested in the creation of the seven heavens and the earth.
    1. O Prophet, if you divorce women, you can only divorce them according to (the rules governing) the set period (`iddah) and (pay careful attention to) reckoning the `iddah. And be pious to Allah your Lord and revere Him, and do not drive them out of the homes (where they are divorced), nor should they themselves depart from there before the conclusion of the `iddah unless they have come up with an evident obscenity. These are the limiting bounds by Allah, and he who transgresses the bounds of Allah, then he has done injustice to himself. You (who divorce your wife) do not know, perhaps Allah will effect a new Command (return her back).
    2. When the `iddah is (near) fulfillment, either retain them beneficently or part from them beneficently. In either case, you must bring two witnesses of your people who are known to be just and keep up the testimony for Allah (be it divorce or reunion). This is an admonition to those who believe in Allah and the Last Day. And whoever is pious to Allah, He will make for him a way out.
    3. He will provide for him from where he does not reckon. And he who puts his trust in Allah will find in Allah his Reckoner. Allah will accomplish His Command; Allah has made determined estimate for everything. 
    4. And those of your women who despaired of their menstrual courses and you are in suspicion (doubt of the date or of the nature of the discharge), then their `iddah is three months. A similar `iddah (three months) is obligatory for those who have not yet menstruated. As for those who are pregnant, their `iddah (is for the duration of the pregnancy and) ends when they bring forth their burden. And for him who is pious, Allah will make, with His Command, easiness. 
    5. This is Allah’s Command that He sent down to you. And he who is pious to Allah, He will expiate for him his odious deeds, and magnify the reward for him. 
    6. Let them dwell where you dwell in accordance with your means, and do not inflict any harm on them (in order to force them into a course of action that is profitable to you). If they are pregnant, you must support them by expenditure until they are disburdened. If they suckle for you, then you must give them their rewards, and deliberate together in each other’s regard with beneficence. If you should encounter difficulties, then the child may be nursed at the breast of another.
    7. Everyone with affluence must spend according to his affluence, and he whose provisions are restricted shall spend in accordance with what Allah has given him. Allah does not charge anyone to spend except of what He has given him, and in an instance of hardship, Allah will bring ease.
    8. Many towns rebelled against the Command of their Lord and His Messengers, so We reckoned with a strict reckoning, and tormented it a maleficent torment.
    9. So, it tasted the pernicious result of its affair; and the end of its affair was loss. 
    10. And Allah has prepared for them a strict torment. So be pious to Allah, you who are endowed with intellects, who have believed; for Allah has sent down to you a Reminder (the Qur’an). 
    11. Assuredly Allah sent down to you a Messenger to recite to you Allah’s evident verses to take those who believe and do righteous deeds from the darkness (of disbelief) to the light (of faith). And he who believes and do righteousness, He will make him enter Gardens beneath which rivers run, eternally abiding therein forever. And Allah has made for him a fair provision.
    12. Allah is He Who created seven heavens and of the earth the like. His Command keeps coming down among them so that you know that Allah is Ever-Determiner over everything, and that Allah has encompassed everything in knowledge.

