SURAH 66
AT-TAHRIM
The Forbidding
Revealed at Madinah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah refers to an incident that made the Prophet angry with some of his wives and made him abstain from some pleasures that Allah had made lawful to him. It cautions his wives of the unfavorable consequences of their actions. Then it commands the believers to protect themselves and their families from a Fire whose fuel is mankind and stones. It points out that apologies will not be accepted from the disbelievers on the Day of Judgment. It calls on the believers to repent to Allah sincerely and on the Prophet to strive against the disbelievers and hypocrites and to be harsh with them. It ends by giving some examples to show that the righteousness of husbands does not protect their spoiled wives from Allah’s punishment, and the perversion of husbands does not harm their righteous wives, as every person will be pledged for whatever he or she has earned.
 
    1. O Prophet, why do you forbid what Allah has made lawful to you for the sake of giving satisfaction to your wives? Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.
    2. Allah has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths. Allah is your Patronizer; He is The All-Knowing and The All-Wise.
    3. And once the Prophet disclosed a discourse in confidence to one of his wives (Hafsah). When she disclosed it (to `A'ishah), Allah made that known to the Prophet; and he informed part of it, and left a part. Then when he told her (Hafsah) of it, she exclaimed, “Who informed you this?” He said, “It was informed to me by The All-Knowing, The All-Cognizant.” 
    4. If both of you (wives) repent to Allah, then your hearts are indeed so inclined (to oppose what the Prophet likes), and if you back one another against him, then Allah is his Patronizer and so are Jibril (Angel Gabriel) and the righteous among the believers. And, moreover, the angels back him.
    5. If he should divorce you all, Allah may give him in exchange more charitable wives than you. Such wives will be Muslims, believers, devout, repentant, worshiping Allah, emigrants (or fasting), previously married and virgins.   
    6. O you who believe, protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is mankind and stones, guarded by angels who are stern and severe. They never disobey a Command given by Allah, and they perform whatever they are commanded. 
    7. The disbelievers will be told, “Make no excuses on this day. You are being recompensed for what you were doing.”
    8. O you who believe, repent to Allah an honest repentance. It may be that your Lord will expiate for you your odious deeds and make you enter Gardens where rivers flow beneath (its palaces and trees). This is the day Allah will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believed with him. Their light proceeds ahead of them and to their right side. They say, “Our Lord, perfect our light and forgive us. You are Ever-Determiner over everything.”
    9. O Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Be harsh with them. Their abode is Hell, and how miserable is the destination!
    10. Allah cites examples of those who disbelieved: the wife of Nuh (Noah) and the wife of Lut (Lot). They were wives of two of Our righteous worshipers, but they betrayed them. Their husbands could not avail them anything before Allah, and it was said to them, “Enter the Fire with those who enter.”
    11. And Allah cites an example of those who believed Pharaoh's wife who invoked Allah, “My Lord, build for me a house in your Providence in the Garden and deliver me from Pharaoh and his work and deliver me from the unjust people.”
    12. (Another example Allah cites is) Maryam (Mary) the daughter of `Imran, who guarded her private parts. So, We breathed in her of Our Spirit, and she sincerely testified to the truth of the Words of her Lord, and His books, and she was one of the devout.


