SURAH 67
AL-MULK
The Sovereignty
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah is named after the word for sovereignty in the first verse. This surah draws people’s attention and thoughts to the signs of Allah’s omnipotence in themselves and in the horizons so that they may believe in Allah and the Last Day. It depicts the state of the disbelievers when they are cast into Hellfire; they hear it sighing, roast in it, confess their guilty deeds, and feel sorry for their end. The angels reproach them for rejecting the message the Prophet called them to follow. But those who revered Allah as He deserves and submitted to Him will have their inequities and mistakes forgiven, and a great reward for their strife in life below will be conferred on them.

    1. Blessed is He in Whose Hand is the Kingdom, and He is Ever-Determiner over everything.
    2. He is Who created death and life to try you, whichever of you is fairest in deeds; He is The All-Mighty and The Oft-Forgiving.
    3. He is Who created the seven heavens one above another. You can see no disproportion or deformity in the creation of The All-Merciful, so turn your look again and see if you can see any rifts.
    4. Then again turn your look recurring twice, you will find it return to you regretful and weary. 
    5. And We adorned the lowermost heaven with shining stars, and We made them outcast meteorites for the devils for whom We have prepared torment in the blazes of Hell.
    6. As for those who disbelieved in their Lord, there awaits them the torment in Hell. Miserable is the end for which they are destined!
    7. When they are cast into it, they hear it raging, as it is boiling over. 
    8. It would almost burst with rage. As often as a fresh group is thrown within, its keepers ask them, “Did no warner come to you?”
    9. “Yes, indeed,” they will say, “a warner came to us, but we cried lies and said, “Allah has not sent anything. You are only in great error.”
    10. And they add, “Had we heard or considered, we would never be among the dwellers of the Blaze.”
    11. They will confess their guilty deeds, and so, away with the dwellers of the Blaze!
    12. But those who are apprehensive of their Lord in the Unseen, will merit forgiveness and a great reward.
    13. Whether you converse secretly or aloud, He is Ever-Knowing of (the inmost thoughts) within the breasts.
    14. Should He not know Who has created? And He is The Most Kind, The Ever-Cognizant. 
    15. He is Who made the earth for you tractable, so walk along its tracks and eat from the sustenance He provided. Then back to Him is the Rising-up.
    16. Do you feel secure that He Who is in His Heaven will not cause the earth to cave in on you, and it will be whirling?
    17. Or do you feel secure that He Who is in His Heaven will not drive against you a squall of gravel? And only then will you know Allah's warning.
    18. People before them, Muhammad, and those of the distant past cried lies, then how was My disclaiming punishment!
    19. Do they not see the birds above them soaring with extended wings, and (at times) folding them? No one can uphold them but The All-Merciful. He is, indeed, The All-Seer of all things.
    20. Who is he who can save you from punishment apart from The All-Merciful? Indeed, the disbelievers are only in delusion.
    21. And who is he who can provide you (with what is requisite for your sustenance) if He holds back His provisions? No one, but they persist in rebellion and repulsion.
    22. Does the one who walks stumbling and stooping with his face downwards (turning away from the path of righteousness) one better guided than he who walks on the straight Path?
    23. Say to them, Muhammad, “He is, Allah, Who brought you into being and made for you hearing, sight and hearts; but little do you thank (Him)!”
    24. Say to them, Muhammad, “He is, Allah, Who has propagated you throughout the earth. Then to Him alone you will be mustered.”
    25. The disbelievers say, “When will this promised event come to pass if you are sincerely declaring the truth?”
    26. Say to them, Muhammad, “The knowledge of this is with Allah; I am only an evident warner.”
    27. Then when the Day of Judgment is drawn forward, the faces of the disbelievers will be vexed. They will be told, “This is what you used to call for.”
    28. Say to them, “If Allah were to cause me to perish and those who followed me or were to confer on us mercy, who can give protection to disbelievers from painful torment?”
    29. Say to them, “He is The All-Merciful. We believed in Him, and in Him alone we trust. And soon will you know who is in evident error.”
    30. Say to them, “What if your water suddenly sinks, Who else other than Allah can possibly supply you with streaming profuse water?”


