SURAH 68
AL-QALAM
The Pen
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah advocates the Prophet, supports him, and strengthens his morals so that he keeps adhering to the truth without showing any leniency in it toward anybody. It forms a similitude between the punishment that inflicted the people of Makkah and that which inflicted the owners of the orchard whose story is narrated in this surah. It also gives glad tidings to the believers of what Allah is storing for them, stressing that believers and disbelievers are not equal. It rejects the allegations the disbelievers untruthfully ascribe to themselves, and cautions them of their expected state in the Hereafter, threatening them. The surah advises the Prophet to be patient and forbearing. It ends with glorifying the Ever-Glorious Qur’an.
 
    1. N (nun). (The surah starts with this letter from the Arabic alphabet to draw attention to the miracle of the Qur’an, which, though written in the people’s language, cannot be emulated). I swear by the pen which they use in writing,
    2. You (Muhammad), by the favor of your Lord, are not a madman.
    3. And you will have a bountiful endless reward.
    4. And you are a man of a magnificent character.
    5. Soon you will see, and they will see.
    6. Which of you is demented. 
    7. Surely, your Lord knows best those who erred away from His Way and He knows those guided. 
    8. Do not (Muhammad) obey the beliers. 
    9. They would like you to dissimulate, then they would dissimulate. 
    10. Nor obey every contemptible swearer.
    11. A slanderer, going about with detraction,
    12. Preventer of charity, a vicious transgressor, 
    13. Crude, and of spurious parentage after all. 
    14. Because he has been given wealth and children.
    15. When Our Verses are recited, he says, “Myths of the earliest people!”
    16. We will brand him markedly on the snout.
    17. We have put (the people of Makkah) to the test, just as We tried the owners of the orchard plucking all the fruit the next morning. 
    18. And without mentioning Allah and saying “in sha’ Allah (if Allah wills).” 
    19. But the orchard was visited by a visitation from your Lord (that did away with it) while they were asleep, 
    20. So that it became wrested away by the morning.
    21. When they woke up they called to one another. 
    22. “Let us go forth early upon our tillage, if you would wrest away (the fruit).”
    23. And so they went to their orchard speaking in hushed voices,
    24. So that no indigent person shall enter it today upon you.
    25. And thus they went forth early, furiously determined on interdiction .
    26. And when they saw (the orchard black and burned), they said, “We must have erred from our way.” 
    27. But (having recognized the calamity), they said, “We have been dispossessed!”
    28. The moderate among them said, “Would it not have been befitting that we extolled (Allah)?”
    29. Now they said, “Extolled be Allah, Our Lord. Surely, we were unjust.”
    30. Then they turned blaming each other.
    31. Woe to us! Surely, we were inordinate! 
    32. “We hope that Allah, our Lord, may give us in exchange what is better. Surely, we are desirous (of His Grace).”
    33. Such is the torment (I inflict on those who deserve it), and greater will be the torment Hereafter if only they knew.
    34. But for the pious will be the Gardens of Bliss.
    35. Or will We make the Muslims like the criminals?
    36. What is it with you? How do you judge? 
    37. Or do you have a Book wherein you study?
    38. That you have therein what you choose!
    39. Or did you have oaths with Us until the Day of Resurrection, that yours is whatever you judge!
    40. Ask the idolaters, Muhammad, “Who will assertively guarantee that?”
    41. Or do they have associates (who advocate this claim)? If so, ask them to bring their associates if they are sincere.
    42. A Day will come when distress will be imposed, and the shin will be uncovered, and they will be called to prostrate before their Creator but they will not be able. 
    43. Submissive will be their gazes, and humbleness will oppress them. And they had been called to prostrate themselves while they were safe.
    44. So leave to Me the one who cries lies to this Discourse (the Qur’an). We will soon draw them gradually (to punishment) from where they do not know.
    45. I give them respite (and delay My punishment), but My plotting is ever-pervading.
    46. Or do you ask them for a reward, so that they are weighed down with heavy fines?
    47. Or do they have the Unseen and they write it down?
    48. So be patient, Muhammad, for the Judgment of your Lord. Be not like the companion of the whale (Yunus [Jonah]), as he called out when he was chocking with sorrow.
    49. And had it not been for the favor of Allah, his Lord, on him (and He accepted his repentance), he would have been flung off on the naked shore, while he was a reprobate. 
    50. Then His Lord selected him, and made him among the righteous.
    51. When the disbelievers hear you (recite the Qur’an), Muhammad, they would almost trip you with their sights;  they say, “Surely, he is, indeed, a madman.”
    52. In fact, the Qur’an is but a Reminder to the worlds.


