SURAH 69
The Reality
AL-HAQQAH
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah portrays the Day of Resurrection and reminds us of the severe punishment that inflicted past nations when they denied Allah. It mentions the blowing of the horn and the following changes in and destruction of the skies and the mountains, as well as the assembly before Allah. It gives glad tidings to the companions of the right and warns the companions of the left. It ends with asserting the truthfulness of the message conveyed by the Prophet and the truthfulness of the Qur’an, which is the truth of certitude.
 
    1. The Inevitable Truth.
    2. What is the Inevitable Truth?
    3. What makes you realize what the Inevitable Truth is and depict its horribleness!
    4. The people of Thamud and those of `Ad cried lies to the Smiter. 
    5. Thamud were made to perish by the inordinate convulsion.
    6. And `Ad were made to perish by a cold wind clamorous and furious.
    7. Which was directed against them for seven successive nights and eight gruesome successive days; you could see them overthrown as if they were hollow stumps of palm trees.
    8. And now do you see any remnants of them?
    9. And there were Pharaoh and those before him and the cities of falsehood with their sinfulness. 
    10. They disobeyed the messenger of Allah their Lord, so He overtook them with a surpassing grip.
    11. When the water overflowed, We carried you in the floating ship.
    12. To make it a Reminder for you and to make heeding ears to heed.
    13. When the trumpet is blown one blowing,
    14. And the earth and the mountains are lifted and in one pounding they are pounded, 
    15. On that Day, the Inevitable Event will befall.
    16. And the heaven will be cloven, for that Day it will be frail. 
    17. And the angels now will be on its dimensions; eight of them will carry your Lord's throne.
    18. There and then will all of you be brought (to Allah) for judgment, and not a single action (of your worldly deeds) will be concealed.
    19. Then he who is given his book (bearing his record) in his right hand will say, “There, you may read my book.”
    20. “Surely, I thought that I should meet my reckoning!”
    21. Such a person will live in a satisfied livelihood.
    22. In a Garden exalted,
    23. With fruit on branches within easy reach.
    24. They will be told, “Eat and drink, rejoicing in return for the deeds you had done in the bygone days.”
    25. But he whose book is given in his left hand will say, “I wish I had never been given my book,
    26. “And that I had not realized my reckoning.
    27. “Would that it had been the decreed end (death)!
    28. “My wealth has not availed me; my influence, 
    29. “And my authority has perished away from me.” 
    30. “Take him and shackle him up,
    31. “Thereafter roast him in the Hellfire,
    32. “Thereafter in a chain of seventy cubits' length insert him!”
    33. Surely, he did not believe in Allah, The Ever-Magnificent. 
    33. Nor did he urge the feeding of the indigent.
    35. So today he has no close friend.
    36. Nor will he be fed except upon bloody discharges, 
    37. That no one eats except the sinners.
    38. I swear by all that you can see, 
    39. And by all that you cannot see, 
    40. Surely, this is the saying of an honorable messenger!
    41. And it is not the saying of a poet, little do you believe!
    42. Nor is it the saying of a soothsayer, little do you remember!
    43. They are (words) sent down by Allah the Lord of the worlds.
    44. And if the Messenger had forged false sayings against Us,
    45. We would have taken him by the right hand,
    46. And We would have cut his aorta. 
    47. And no one among you would withhold Us (from Our punishment).
    48. But the Qur’an is (a revelation) to remind those who are pious.
    49. We know that among you people are some beliers. 
    50. And that it is a source of regret for the disbelievers.
    51. But the Qur’an is the Truth of certitude. 
    52. And so, extol with the Name of your Lord, The Ever-Magnificent.

