SURAH 70
AL-MA`ARIJ
Ascent and Rate of Motion
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah portrays a phase of Doomsday and indicates the length of this day and its horribleness and torments. No one can be redeemed from its endless severe punishment, even with the lives of children, wives, brother, kinsmen, or of all people on earth.
    It condemns the weakness of man in welfare and hardship, except those whom Allah has crowned with piety and good deeds; they will be delivered of such weakness.
    It also condemns the corrupt greed of the disbelievers and ends with commanding the Prophet to leave them to wallow in vain talk and play until they meet the Day of theirs that they are promised.
  
    1. A questioner asked about a befalling torment,
    2. For the disbelievers, for which there is no repelling
    3. From Allah, The Owner of the stairways.
    4. To Him ascend the angels and Jibril (Angel Gabriel) in a day that equals fifty thousand years (of the earthly calendar).
    5. Therefore, Muhammad, endure patiently with becoming patience.
    6. Surely, they see it far off.
    7. But We see it near. 
    8. That is the Day when the heaven will look like melted metal,
    9. And the mountains will be as wool-tufts.
    10. And no intimate friend will put a question to an intimate friend (or ask about him), 
    11. All will be made to see and know each other. Then and there the criminal will like he could be redeemed from that torment upon that Day with the lives of his own children, 
    12. And his female companion and his brother,
    13. And his nearest kin who gave him abode,
    14. And all those on earth, that this might save him.
    15.Not at all. Surely, it is a fierce Blaze,
    16. Constantly plucking the scalps
    17. Calling him who withdrew and turned away.
    18. And gathered (riches), and prudently (hoarded). 
    19. Man is created most fretful.
    20. when evil touches him, he is most impatient,
    21. And when good touches him, he is a constant preventer,
    22. Except those who pray,
    23. Who constantly observe their prayer. 
    24. In whose wealth there is a known truthful duty.
    25. For the beggar and the dispossessed.
    26. Who sincerely believe in the Day of Doom.
    27. And who are timorous of the torment of their Lord.
    28. Surely, no one can feel safe from his Lord’s torment. 
    29. Who  preserve their private parts
    30. Except for their wives and with those of the captives in their hands—the act then incurring no blame. 
    31. But whoever goes beyond that is one who has transgressed (the commandment of Allah).
    32. Who honor their trusts and keep their covenants,
    33. Whose testimonies are kept up.
    34. Who preserve their prayers.
    35. These and such persons will be honored in Gardens.
    36. Why have those who disbelieve hurry with heads protruding against you?
    37. On the right and on the left in sundry batches?
    38. Does every person of them long to be made to enter a Garden of Bliss?
    39. Never! We created them from that which they know.
    40. I swear by the Lord (of all the eastern cardinal points near which the sun rises in its apparent passage through the zodiac and by the Lord of all the western cardinal points lying opposite those in the east and near which the sun sets), that We are The Determiners,
    41. To exchange a people more charitable than them, and We will never be outstripped.
    42. So, Muhammad, let them wade and play until they meet the Day of theirs, which they are promised. 
    43. The Day when they will rush out of their graves as if racing toward the standard idols.
    44. Submissive will be their gazes, oppressed by humbleness. That is the Day, which they were promised.

