SURAH 71
NUH
Noah
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah mentions details of the story of Nuh (Noah) with his people: his public and secret call to them, his invocation for Allah’s help against his people after he had failed to convince them, and their insistence on worshiping idols, which incurred Allah’s wrath on them. When Nuh was sure that they would not accept his call, he supplicated Allah to destroy and annihilate them, and to forgive himself, his parents, and male and female believers.

    1. We sent Nuh to his people to warn them (of disobeying Allah) before there should come to them a painful torment.
    2. Nuh said to them, “My people, I am sent to you as an evident warner.
    3. That you should worship Allah, be pious to Him, and obey me.
    4. He will forgive you your guilty deeds and defer you to an appointed term. Surely, the term of Allah cannot be deferred when it comes, if only you know.” 
    5. Nuh said, “O Allah, I called my people night and day.
    6. But my calling only increased them in flight (from truth).
    7. As often as I called them that You may forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears and enveloped themselves with their clothes and they persisted (in disbelief) and waxed proud with arrogance.”
    8. Nuh continued, “I also proclaimed to them (Your message) openly.
    9. And I declared to them in public and in private.
    10. I said to my people, ‘Invoke your Lord’s forgiveness for your disbelief and disobedience. He is always Oft-Forgiving.
    11. He will send rain from heaven plentifully.
    12. And He will supply you with riches and children and set up for you gardens and set up for you rivers.
    13. Why do you not revere Allah (as He deserves), when you hope to get your reward,
    14. And He already created you by stages?
    15. Do you not see how Allah created seven heavens in layers?
    16. And has made the moon as light therein, and He has made the sun a luminary? 
    17. Do you not see how Allah made you grow up from the earth (and spread)? 
    18. Then He will return you back to it (at death), and then He will resurrect you (at a later date).
    19. Do you not see how Allah spread the earth out for you as a wide expanse,
    20. That you may travel through it in spacious ways?’”
    21. Nuh said, “My Lord, my people disobeyed me, and followed those whose wealth and children have not increased them in anything except greater loss (in the Hereafter).
    22. And they have schemed a heinous scheming. 
    23. “They said to them, ‘Never leave behind your gods or the idols Wadd and Suwa`a, nor Yaghuth, Ya`uq and Nasr.’ 
    24. And with such idols they misled many; therefore, (I beseech You, Allah to) increase the unjust in nothing except error.”
    25. Therefore, on account of their offenses, they were drowned (in the flood). Then they were made to enter a Fire; so, they did not find, apart from Allah, any vindicators.
    26. Then Nuh supplicated Allah, “O Allah my Lord, I beseech You to leave no one of these disbelievers dwelling on the earth.
    27. For if You leave any of them behind, they will only lead Your bondmen into error and will beget none except impious disbelievers.”
    28. Nuh then prayed, “O Allah my Lord, forgive me and my parents and all the believers who enter my house, and forgive all the believers among the men and the women, and do not increase the unjust except in annihilation!”


