SURAH 72
AL-JINN
The Jinn
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    In this surah, Allah commands His Messenger to convey to the people that the jinn listened to his recitation of the Qur’an and that they responded to him favorably, and to narrate to them the reaction of the foolish jinn and the righteous jinn. They used to sit in high places there to overhear, yet whoever listens now finds a flame in wait for him. The surah also mentions those who submitted and adhered to Islam and those who denied it. It asserts that mosques and worship are dedicated only to Allah. It speaks about the Messenger’s endeavor to call people to Allah and how the jinn surrounded him. The surah defines what the Messenger is entitled to do and what he is not entitled to do, and it warns those who disobey Allah and His Messenger of Hellfire and their abiding in it eternally. In the end, the surah says that Allah alone knows the unseen and that He discloses it only to the one whom He chooses of His creation to be a Messenger, one who exerts all his efforts to keep the revelation and convey it complete to people.
 
    1. Say, Muhammad (to your people), “It has been revealed to me that a batch of jinn listened (to the recital of the Qur’an). And they said (to their people), ‘We have heard a wonderful Qur’an.
    2. It guides to rectitude, so we believe in it, and we will never associate anyone else with (Allah) our Lord.
    3. Exalted be our Lord's Dignity! Never did He take a wife nor did He beget a son.
    4. And the foolish among us used to say against Allah excessive impiety.
    5. And we thought that among the men and the jinn there would never be those who utter lies against Allah.
    6. We found that some men among mankind used to take refuge with some men among the jinn, so the jinn increased them with overburdened (sins).
    7. The jinn thought as you did, mankind, that Allah would never resurrect anyone.
    8. We touched the (lower) heaven, so we found it filled with stern guards (of angels) and (fiery) meteors. 
    9. And we sit there on stations for hearing. But now he of us who (endeavors to) hear, finds a flaming meteor closely observing him. 
    10. And we do not realize whether evil is intended for those on earth, or that their Lord intends for them rectitude.
    11. Yet among us jinn are those who are righteous and those who are lesser than that; we are of discrete roads.
    12. We have realized that we will never be able to defy Allah in the earth, nor can we defy Him by escaping.
    13. And when we heard the guidance (the Qur’an), we believed in it; so whoever believes in his Lord fears no depreciation or overburdened sins. 
    14. Among us jinn are Muslims and others inequitable. And those who have submitted to Allah have in effect sought rectitude.’”
    15. Those who are inequitable, then they are firewood for Hell.
    16. Had (mankind and the jinn) followed the right Road, We (Allah) would have blessed them with copious water;
    17. To try (how they will express their gratitude for Allah’s favors on them), he who veers away from remembering (Allah) his Lord, will be inserted into a mounting torment.
    18. And that mosques belong to Allah; therefore, never invoke anyone with Allah.
    19. And that when the (Messenger and) bondman of Allah rose up invoking, the jinn densely packed around him. 
    20. Say to them, “I only invoke (Allah) my Lord, with Him I associate none.”
    21. Tell them, “It is not within my power to afflict you with harm, nor rectitude.”
    22. Say to them, “No one can protect me from Allah, nor will I find anyone apart from Him to afford me a shielding, 
    23. Except the proclamation from Allah and His Messages; and he who disobeys Allah and His Messenger and turns his back to them will suffer in the Fire of Hell, where he and such persons will eternally abiding therein.”
    24. Till, when it is the Day to see what has been promised, there and then they will know who is weaker in vindicators and fewer in numbers. 
    25. Say to the disbelievers, “I do not realize whether what you were promised is near or that my Lord has set for it a distant span.”
    26. “He, Allah, alone knows the Unseen and He does not disclose His Unseen to anyone.
    27. Except to a Messenger He is Satisfied with. Then He dispatches before him and behind him observers.”
    28. That Allah knows that His messengers have proclaimed their Lord’s messages, and He encompasses what is within them and what is without. He keeps count of everything.


