SURAH 73
AL-MUZZAMMIL
Clothed in Heavy Attire
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    In this surah Allah commands His Messenger to rise a good deal of the night to pray and recite the Qur’an, and so he did, together with a group of those who followed him. Then Allah eases this command and recommends them to pray, give zakah, and ask for forgiveness. Allah also commands the Messenger to endure patiently with what the disbelievers say and to let them confront the punishment that Allah has prepared for them. He threatens the disbelievers with a punishment similar to that which was inflicted on Pharaoh and his followers when they disobeyed their Creator’s commands, and cautions them of the horrible events of the Day of Resurrection.
 
    1. O you who are clothed in heavy attire, 
    2. Rise up praying by night except for a little;
    3. Rise up half of it or diminish thereof a little.
    4. Or increase thereof, and recite the Qur’an a distinct recitation.
    5. We will cast down to you, Messenger, the Qur’an, a weighty saying.
    6. The worship that takes place in the night is more intense in performance and more upright in oration.
    7. You have by day to attend (to the world) and its prolonged occupations. 
    8. Always remember the Name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him with complete devotion.
    9. He is the Lord of the east and the west; there is no god but Him; take Him to yourself an Ever-Trusted Trustee.
    10. And endure patiently what they say and forsake them with a becoming forsaking. 
    11. And leave to Me the beliers, who are endowed with earthly comfort and give them leisure for a little while.
    12. We have fetters, and a raging Hell.
    13. And food that chokes, and a painful torment.
    14. One Day the earth and the mountains will be in commotion, and the mountains will be a heap of sand let loose. 
    15. O you (people of Makkah), We have sent you a Messenger who will bear witness (to your deeds and actions hereafter), just as We sent (Musa [Moses] as) a Messenger to Pharaoh. 
    16. But Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger, so We took him a baneful taking. 
    17. So if you people disbelieve, how would you protect yourselves from a Day that will make the new-born's hair turn white?
    18. It is a Day of violent physical disturbance that rends the heaven to pieces; indeed, Allah’s promise is certainly accomplished.
    19. These revelations present a reminder for him who takes a way to his Lord.
    20. Allah your Lord knows that you, Muhammad, and a section of those who follow you rise up at times less than two-thirds of the night or half the night and other times one-third of it. Only Allah can determine the duration of the night and the day-time. He knew you would not be able to determine the duration of each part of day and night, and so He relented towards you. Therefore, read as much of the Qur’an as much as is easy (for you). He knows that among you there will be those who (are suffering from illness) and others are journeying in the land for trade or work, seeking Allah’s Grace; others are in the Way of Allah.  Therefore, read of the Qur’an as much as easy (for you), and keep up the prayers and give the zakah. Also, lend Allah all you can of your benevolence (by giving to the poor). And whatever charity you will forward for yourselves, you will find that its reward is more charitable and more magnificent in reward. And invoke Allah to forgive you (your inequities). Allah is indeed Oft-Forgiving and Ever-Merciful.



