SURAH 74
AL-MUDDATHTHIR
The Heavily Garbed
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah urges Allah’s Messenger to warn his people and glorify Allah and avoid inequities. Then it speaks about the blowing of the Trumpet and how punishment will torment the disbelievers. It commands him to disregard the one who denied Allah’s favors yet asks for more without acknowledging or showing gratitude to Him. It also shows the way that this disbeliever weighs matters and that he denies the Qur’an. It details his torment in Saqar, which is described as horrifying and anguishing. Then the surah reminds people of what they lawfully or unlawfully earn and speaks about the status of the companions of the right and how they reproach the disbelievers by asking them why they were sent to Saqar. It ends with talking about the Qur’an, that it is a reminder for whoever decides to ponder, stressing that those who ponder are those who are pious and worthy of forgiveness. 
 
    1. O you who are garbed in heavy cloth, 
    2. Rise and warn,
    3. And magnify your Lord,
    4. And purify your clothes.
    5. And defilement forsake.
    6. And be not bountiful so as to gain more.
    7. And for the sake of Allah’s satisfaction, exercise patience.
    8. For when finally the trumpet is sounded.
    9. Then it is a difficult Day (of heavy consequence).
    10. Far from being easy for the disbelievers.
    11. Now leave to Me alone the one whom I created lonely.
    12. And set up for him extensive wealth.
    13. And children always in his presence.
    14. And made life comfortable for him.
    15. And he expects that I increase my favors.
    16. Yet how obstinate to Our signs,
    17. I will oppress him with severe mounting calamities. 
    18. He pondered and he determined!
    19. So may he be slain, how he determined!
    20. Again he may be slain, how he determined!
    21. Then he looked around.
    22. Thereafter he frowned and scowled.
    23. Thereafter he withdrew and waxed proud.
    24. Then he said, “This is nothing but sorcery, relics of old.
    25. “It is nothing but words expressed by mortals.”
    26. There I will roast him Saqar (Hellfire).
    27. And what will make you realize what Saqar is?
    28. It never spares nor leaves anything unburnt,
    29. Shrivelling mortals.
    30. Over it are nineteen angels.
    31. We made the Wardens of the Fire none but angels, and We stated their number only to try those disbelievers, to assure those who have been given Divine Book of the certitude of (what Muhammad says regarding) the guards of Hell (as it accords with what is mentioned in their Books). And to increase the belief of the believers; and to give neither a party of the People of the Book nor the believers an occasion to suspicion; and that in whose hearts is sickness and the disbelievers may say, “What does Allah intend by this similitude?” Thus Allah leads in to error whomsoever He decides, and guides whomsoever He decides. And no one knows the hosts of your Lord except He. And this is nothing except a Reminder to the mortals. 
    32. Nay by the moon,
    33. And by the night as it withdraws,
    34. And by the morning when it brightens
    35. Saqar is one of the great signs.
    36. A warning to mortals.
    37. To those of you who go forward with good deeds, or who postpone and fall into evil.
    38. Every self will be pledged for what it has earned.
    39. Except the companions of the Right.
    40. In Gardens, they will ask each other,
    41. Concerning the criminals,
    42. “What inserted you into Saqar?”
    43. “We were not among those who offered prayers,” 
    44. They will admit, “nor did we feed the indigent,
    45. “And we used to wade with the waders in vain talk,
    46. “And we used to cry lies to the Day of Doom,
    47. “Until the Certitude (death) came to us.”
    48. There and then, no intercession by the intercessors could profit them.
    49. But why would veer away from the Reminder?
    50. As if they were stampeding asses,
    51. Fleeing from a fierce beast.
    52. Nay, every one of these disbelievers would have scrolls spread open (to be revealed to him alone).
    53. But no, they do not fear the Hereafter.
    54. Yet (this Qur’an) is a Reminder. 
    55. He who decides will remember it.
    56. But they will not remember except when Allah has so willed. He is The Source of piety and The Source of forgiveness.


