SURAH 76
AL-'INSAN (or AD-DAHR)
Mankind (or Time)
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah speaks about the creation of man and his testing and the faculties he has, for which he is either grateful or ungrateful to Allah. It gives a brief account of the disbelievers’ requital and a detailed account of the favors and grace Allah has conferred on the believers. Then it addresses Allah’s Messenger, reminding him that it is Allah Who has sent down the Qur’an to him and commanding him to be patient and to constantly keep remembering Allah. It warns those who love this life below and prefer it to the Hereafter; it shows that these signs and verses are only an admonition for him who decides to follow the path prescribed by Allah. The surah asserts that this can only happen by Allah’s will and that Allah’s mercy and punishment are due to whom Allah wills.
 
    1. Has there come over man a while of time, when he was not a thing to be mentioned?
    2. We created man from a sperm-drop, a mingling; trying him, so We made him hearer and seer. 
    3. We guided him to the (right) Way and left him to choose whether to be thankful or most disbelieving. 
    4. We have prepared chains, shackles, and blazing fire for the disbelievers.
    5. But the righteous benigns will enjoy a drink whose blend is camphor.
    6. A spring from which the bondmen of Allah will drink, making it to gush forth plenteous gushing.
    7. Those who kept their vows and feared a Day whose evil is widespread.
    8. For the love of Allah, they fed the indigent (who cannot earn his living), the orphan (who lost his parent), and the captive who owns nothing.
    9. They say to themselves, “We supply you with the necessities for the Face of Allah. We would not have from you any recompense or thanks.
    10. “We fear from Our Lord a Day, most frowning, most inauspicious.”
    11. Consequently, Allah has protected them from the evil of that Day and gave them bloom and pleasure.
    12. And He has recompensed them for their patience, a Garden and silken (garments).
    13. Reclining on couches, they do not see a sun nor an excessively bitter cold.
    14. And the shades thereof are close upon them, and the picked fruit are brought meekly within reach.
    15. And there will be passed for them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal.
    16. Crystals of silver with measure, determined an exact determination.
    17. The believers are served in cups with drinks 
    18. (Streaming) from a fountain named Salsabil.
    19. They are attended by young everlasting youths who go around them. If you see them, you reckon them as strewn pearls. 
    20. If you were to look there, what you would see would be only bliss and a great kingdom.
    21. They are dressed in green sarcenet ornamented with brocade and their wrists are adorned with silver bracelets. And their Lord gives them a drink most pure.
    22. They will be told, “Such magnificent reward has been to you in recompense of your deeds, and on your endeavor will be thanked.”
    23. We have sent down to you the Qur’an a successive sending down.
    24. So, be patient with the Judgment of your Lord, and do not obey any sinner or disbeliever among them.
    25. Keep remember the name of (Allah) your Lord before sunrise and before sunset.
    26. And part of the night, prostrate yourself to Him, and extol Him through the long night.
    27. These people, the disbelievers, love the hasty world, and leave behind them a heavy day.
    28. We created them and strengthened their frame. When We will, We can exchange them by others, an easy exchange. 
    29. This (surah) is a Reminder, so whoever decides, should take a Way to his Lord. 
    30. Nor can you decide (your will) unless Allah decides; He is All-Knowing and All-Wise.
    31. He admits whom He wills into His Mercy, and for the unjust He has prepared a painful torment. 

