SURAH 79
AN-NAZI`AT
Angels of Death
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with a solemn declaration to affirm the reality of Doomsday. Then it alludes to the story of Musa (Moses) and Pharaoh, imparting moral support to Allah’s Messenger, reminding man of his endeavor in life below, and focusing on what awaits the tyrants and betrayers. It ends by referring to the disbelievers’ question of when the Eventful Hour will be. It makes it clear that the Messenger’s only task is to warn him who fears it, not to tell him when it will occur.
 
    1. By the pluckers of the drowning (disbelievers).
    2. And by the sprightly angels acting sprightly.
    3. And by the swimming angels (extolling) swimming. 
    4. Then by the outstripper (angels) outstripping smoothly.
    5. Then by the conducting (angels) conducting according to Allah's Command.
    6. On the Day when the (first) Commotion commoves.
    7. Followed by the subsequent Commotion.
    8. Hearts are that Day in agitation,
    9. Their eyes are submissive. 
    10. They say, “Will we be surely turned back to our former state?”
    11. When we are decayed bones?”
    12. That will be a losing recurrence.
    13. Yet, it shall be only scaring (cry).
    14. Then, they will be wakeful (for judgment).
    15. Have you heard, Muhammad, of the discourse of Musa (Moses)?
    16. As his Lord called him in the holy valley of Tuwa?
    17. “Go to Pharaoh,” Allah said, “for he has been an inordinate (tyrant).
    18. “Say to him: ‘Would you be ready to cleanse yourself,
    19. “‘I will guide you to Allah your Lord, and thus you will be apprehensive of Him.’” 
    20. Then Musa showed Pharaoh the greatest sign (miracle).
    21. But Pharaoh cried lies and disobeyed.
    22.  Then he turned his back endeavoring (to contend the truth with falsehood).
    23. He mustered (his people) and called out,
    24. Then he said, “I am your lord, the most exalted.”
    25. But Allah took him with torture for this last claim and the first claim (when he denied Musa’s message).
    26. Indeed, in this event there is a lesson for him that is apprehensive.
    27. Are you people harder in creation than the heaven? He built it.
    28. He raised up its vault, then He molded it. 
    29. He bedimmed its night and brought out its forenoon. 
    30. And after that, He flattened the earth.
    31. He brought out its water and its pasture. 
    32. And He made the mountains steady (and anchored them),
    33. All being is an enjoyment for you and for your cattle.
    34. Then when the greatest Catastrophe comes,
    35. On the Day when man will remember what he has endeavored (to achieve).
    36. And Hellfire is brought in view for those who see.
    37. Then for him who transgressed to give himself to the life of this world and its vanities, Hell is the abode.
    38. And preferred the present lowly life.
    39. Then surely, Hellfire will be the abode.
    40. But for him who feared the station of his Lord and forbade self-prejudices, Paradise is certainly the abode.
    41. Then surely, the Garden is the abode.
    42. They ask you, Muhammad, when the anchored time of this Hour is.
    43. But how can you be concerned with reminding them of it?
    44. It is only with Allah your Lord that the ultimate knowledge of the appointed time rests.
    45. You are only there as a warner for him who is apprehensive of it.
    46. On the day they see (the Event), it appears to them as if they lingered only an afternoon or a forenoon (in this world).



