SURAH 80
`ABASA
He Frowned
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with Allah blaming the Prophet for frowning at Ibn Umm Maktum when he came to the Prophet seeking his knowledge and guidance. The Prophet was busy arguing with the leaders of the Quraish with the hope that they might respond positively to his message and embrace Islam and, in consequence, many people would follow suit. The surah then reminds man of Allah’s bounties from his birth till his resurrection. It ends with an account of Doomsday, pointing out that the people will be divided into two groups: one group will be beaming, smiling, and rejoicing; whereas the other will be the wicked disbelievers who impudently defied admonition. 
 
    1. The Messenger frowned and turned away
    2. When the blind man came (to inquire about some religious affairs).
    3. (Allah addresses the Prophet): “You, Muhammad, do not realize that possibly the blind man may get cleansed (with what you will teach him).
    4. “Or he might remember and the Reminder would profit him.
    5. “But he who thinks himself (wealthy) self-sufficient,
    6. “You give him attention.
    7. “It is not up to you if he does not cleanse himself.
    8. “But he who comes to you (seeking authoritative counsel and admonition),
    9. “And he is apprehensive (of his Lord),
    10. “Then of him you are unmindful.”
    11. No indeed, it (the Qur’an) is a Reminder.
    12. So, he who decides, will remember it. 
    13. A Qur’an recorded in Scrolls, honored,
    14. Upraised and purified (from any defilement). 
    15. By the hands of serene Scribes,
    16. (Angels who are) honorable and benign.
    17. Slain be man, how disbelieving he is!
    18. From whichever thing did He create him?
    19. He created him from a sperm-drop, and He determined him (in stages).
    20. Then He made the Way easy for him.
    21. Then He caused his death and deposited him in the grave.
    22. Then when He decides, He will resurrect him.
    23. But no, he never performed what He has commanded.
    24. Let man take a look at his food.
    25. We poured down rainwater in abundance.
    26. Then We clove the earth in clefts,
    27. In it We grew the grain,
    28. Grapes and herbage,
    29. Olive trees and date palms,
    30. Orchards with dense trees,
    31. And fruits (for man) and fodder (for animals),
    32. An enjoyment for you and for your cattle.
    33. Then when the Blasting Event comes about,
    34. A person will then flee from his own brother, 
    35. And from his mother and his father,
    36. And from his female companion and his children.
    37. Each of them, then, will have an affair that will preoccupy him.
    38. On that Day, some faces will then be shining,
    39. Laughing, (happy) at the glad tidings. 
    40. Other faces that Day will be coated with resentment.
    41. They will be oppressed by gloom.
    42. These are the impious disbelievers.


