SURAH 81
AT-TAKWIR
The Contraction
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah portrays the events of Doomsday and after. It asserts Allah’s omnipotence and the divine nature of the Qur’an. It assures that the Prophet is not insane, threatens transgressors, and guides to the treasures of the Qur’an from which righteous people may benefit. It affirms that the people’s end will only be decided by Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
 
    1. When once the sun is rolled.
    2. When the stars will be turbid.
    3. When mountains are made to travel,
    4. The precious pregnant animals are untended,
    5. The wild savage beasts are mustered (from their dens highly horrified),
    6. The seas will be seething.
    7. The selves will be paired (bodies with selves).
    8. The female infant buried alive is asked 
    9. For what guilt she was killed (and made to suffer infanticide).
    10. And when the Scrolls will be unrolled.
    11. And when the heaven is scraped off,
    12. And when Hellfire is made to blaze (intensely),
    13. And when the Garden is brought forward,
    14. Then, every self knows what it brought along.
    15. I swear by the heavenly slinkers,
    16. The running stars that (recede and) sink in a retrograde motion,
    17. And by the night when it swarms and softly moves away,
    18. And by the breath of morning,
    19. That the Qur’an is the Word of an honorable Messenger (Jibril).
    20. He is quite powerful and he is established in the Providence of the Owner of the Throne.
    21. And he is obeyed there and trustworthy.
    22. Your companion, the Prophet Muhammad, is not a madman.
    23. For Muhammad certainly saw Angel Jibril (Gabriel) at the evident horizon.
    24. Nor should he be reluctant with the Unseen,
    25. Nor is the Qur’an the word of an outcast Satan.
    26. Then, where are you going?
    27. This Qur’an is but a Reminder to the worlds.
    28. For him among you who decides to go straight.
    29. But even then you cannot exercise your will unless Allah wills. He is the Lord of the worlds.              


