SURAH 83
AL-MUTAFFIFIN
Fraudulent Traders
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with a warning to those who defraud people, whether buying or selling. It portrays people’s tendency to obtain their belongings and rights complete without any defect, and threatens those who defraud people with resurrection and requital, asserting that their deeds are recorded in a book, which is denied by every sinful transgressor, who is barred from Allah and destined to Hellfire.
    Then the verses assure the righteous of their deeds and mentions the blessings stored for them and their distinguishing features. It refers to the blessings for which the competitors compete. The verses also depict what the disbelievers used to do to the believers when they saw or passed by them. The surah ends with assuring the believers that they will be fairly treated on the Day of Judgment and that their abode will be the Garden, where they will laugh at the disbelievers, gracefully seated on high couches beholding how the disbelievers were paid for what they used to do.
    
    1. Woe to those who fraudulently scant the measure. 
    2. Those who, when they receive by measure from mankind, take full measure.
    3. And when they give by measure from others, they cause them loss.
    4. Do they not think they will be resurrected? 
    5. On a great Day.
    6. A Day when mankind will rise and stand before Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
    7. No, but now the Book of the impious is in Sijjin. 
    8. And you just do not realize what Sijjin is like!
    9. A Book imprinted.
    10. Woe, that Day, to those who cry lies to resurrection (and requital)!
    11. Who cry lies to the Day of Doom.
    12. No one cries lies to it but a vicious transgressor,
    13. Who describes Our Signs, when they are recited to him, as myths of the earliest people.
    14. Not at all! But whatever they used to earn has overlaid their hearts.
    15. There and then they will be curtained from their Lord on that Day.
    16. Then, they will indeed be roasting in Hellfire.
    17. There and then they will be told: “This is what you cried lies to.”
    18. Indeed, the Book of the benign is in `Illiyyin.
    19. You just do not realize what `Illiyun is like!
    20. A clearly inscribed Book imprinted,
    21. Witnessed by the angels nearest (to Allah).
    22. The benign will be in Bliss.
    23. On couches beholding (the favors of Allah).
    24. You recognize in their faces the bloom of Bliss.
    25. They are served from sealed nectar.
    26. Whose sealing is Musk; for this then let the competitors compete.
    27. It is blended with ingredients taken from Tasnim, 
    28. Which is a spring for those nearest to Allah.
    29. Those who criminally (denied Allah) used to laugh at those who believed.
    30. When they passed by them, they winked to each other.
    31. And when they turned over to their families, they turned over jesting.
    32. When they saw the believers, they said, “These are, indeed, the erring (faction who believed in Muhammad).” 
    33.These disbelievers were not sent preservers over them.
    34. And so, on the Day of Judgment, Allah’s believers will laugh at the disbelievers.
    35. Gracefully seated on couches, looking (down on them).
    36. Now have the disbelievers not been requited with (what is commensurate with what they did in life below)?

