SURAH 84
AL-INSHIQAQ
The Splitting Asunder
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah mentions some signs of Doomsday. It assures that the heavens and the earth submit to Allah’s will, that mankind will be assembled before their Creator; and that deeds are recorded in a Book that each will receive. The one who takes it by the right hand will face an easy and peaceful requital; whereas the one who takes it by the left hand will encounter suffering in Hellfire. Then Allah swears by some signs that attest to His omnipotence and urges the people to believe in Resurrection; yet, the disbelievers do not submit and deny the Qur’an and refuse its teachings. Then the surah ends with cautioning them that Allah knows all that they store in their hearts, and that He has prepared a tormenting punishment for them and unremitting blessings for the believers.  
 
    1. When once the heaven is cloven, 
    2. And listens submissively to its Lord; and it is bound to do so,
    3. And when the earth is extended out 
    4. And casts away its contents and empties itself 
    5.  And listens submissively to its Lord; and it is bound to do so,
    6. Remember, O man, you are arduously exerting yourself to your Lord with great exertion, then you will meet Him.
    7. Then he who is given the Book (bearing his record) in his right hand 
    8. Will be reckoned an easy reckoning,
    9. And will turn over to his family pleased.
    10. But he who is given the Book (bearing his record) from the back,
    11. Then he will call for detriment,
    12. And will roast at a Blaze.
    13. How was he pleased among his family before!
    14. He surmised he would never recede (to his Lord).
    15. But, in fact, his Lord has ever been beholding him.
    16. I swear by the twilight,
    17. And by the night and whatever load it has!
    18. And by the moon when it is at the full,
    19. You will certainly ride state after state.
    20. What then prevents the disbelievers from believing?
    21. When the Qur’an is read to them, they do not prostrate themselves!*
* A prostration should be performed here. 
    22. No, but the disbelievers inherently cry lies to the truth.
    23. Allah knows best of what they heedfully harbor (in their hearts).
    24. Therefore, Muhammad, give them the tidings of a painful torment.
    25. Except those who believed and did righteous deeds, who will have a reward bountifully unfailing.




