SURAH 85
AL-BURUJ
Constellations
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah exemplifies condolence and remembrance to the believers and a threat to the disbelievers. It opens with Allah swearing by the signs of His omnipotence that those who persecute the believers will be dismissed from His mercy as were dismissed those tyrants who came before them. Then it focuses on giving glad tidings to the believers and threatening the disbelievers. The truth is liable to be obstructed in all eras of time. The Qur’an, which is the basis of the truth, is far from doubt, for it is kept by Allah in the Archetypal Book. 
 
    1. By the heaven comprising the constellations,
    2. And by the Day of which promise has been made, 
    3. And by the witnesses and the horrible events and wonders that will be witnessed that Day, 
    4. Slain were the companions of the trench.
    5. Those who set fire in the trench and supplied it with fuel (to burn those who surrendered themselves to Allah).
    6. They sat around the fire (to watch the believers suffer).
    7. They witnessed what they were doing to the believers.
    8. They took cruel vengeance on them except that they believed in Allah, The All-Mighty and The Worthy of all praise,
    9. Allah to Whom Alone belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, Who witnesses what the believers and the disbelievers do.
    10. Those who tempted the believers among the men and the women (by fire) and did not repent will have the painful torment of the burning Fire.	
    11. But those who believed and did righteous deeds will have Gardens beneath which rivers flow. And such is the great triumph.
    12. The assault of Allah your Lord (on tyrants and transgressors) is extremely severe.
    13. It is He Who begins and repeats.
    14. He is The All-Forgiving, The Ever-Affectionate.
    15. He is Allah Who owns the glorious Throne.
    16. The Sublime Performer of what He wills.
    17. Did you not hear, Muhammad, of the discourse of the hosts,
    18. What happened to Pharaoh and (the tribe of) Thamud (for their tyranny and transgression)?
    19. Yet the disbelievers among your people are more persistent in imputing lies.
    20. Allah is beyond them Ever-Encompassing.
    21. Nay! This is a glorious Qur’an,
    22. In a preserved Tablet.



