SURAH 88
AL-GHASHIYAH
The Overwhelming Event
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    This surah opens with an interesting style that attracts attention to the narratives of Doomsday and its overwhelming events. It points out that people then will be divided into two groups. One is those whose faces are then incensed with humiliation; they are entering into Hell, to suffer the intense heat of the blazing Fire. The other group is those whose faces are radiant with delight, pleased with having endeavored in life to lift their regard to Allah. Then the surah presents clear evidence that attests to Allah’s omnipotence, evidence from what they witness with their eyes and benefit from in their life. Then it commands the Prophet to remind the people of Allah's revelation, as it is his major task, stressing that he does not have authority over them to compel them to adopt faith. Allah will take anyone who denies this admonition by his sins and requite him with a condign punishment, and he will be forever detained in Hell when he comes back to Allah in the Hereafter.
 
    1. Has there come to you the discourse about the Overwhelming Enveloping Event?
    2. Some faces are then submissive,
    3. Laboring, toiling.
    4. Roasting in a Fire burning hot,
    5. Only to be given to drink water from a boiling spring.
    6. And nothing will they feed on but thorny shrubs,
    7. Which neither nourish nor avail from hunger.
    8. There will be other faces that Day will be blissful,
    9. With their endeavor satisfied 
    10. In an exalted Garden.
    11. There they will not hear any idle word,
    12. Therein is water running forth from a spring.
    13. Therein are upraised settees,
    14. And goblets set at hand,
    15. And cushions, ranked in rows, 
    16. And rich carpets outspread.
    17. Do they (the pagan Arabs) not look how camels were created?
    18. How the heaven has been raised,
    19. How the mountains have been set up?
    20. And how the earth has been encrusted?	
    21. Just continue to remind the people, for you are only a constant reminder,
    22. And you have dominion over them.
    23. Except him who has turned away and disbelieved,
    24. Then Allah will torment him with the greatest torment.
    25. Unto Us alone will be their coming back.
    26. And then, their reckoning will be for Us.

   

