SURAH 89
AL-FAJR
The Dawn
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    Allah swears by certain corroboratory phenomena and occasions of His to emphasize His omnipotence and His power of punishing those who deny Him. Then the surah portrays Allah’s testing of His servants by welfare and calamities. It ends by referring to the deep sorrow that will overwhelm the disbelievers, who will wish they had done something good to help save them from the horrendous events of Doomsday. And it refers to the content of the untroubled self that has many good deeds in store, calling it to join the devotees in Paradise.
 
    1. By the dawn.
    2. By the ten (highly esteemed) nights.
    3. And by the even and the odd,
    4. And by the night when it departs.
    5. Is there not an oath in these for a sensible person?
    6. Did you not see how Allah Your Lord has done with `Ad,
    7.  With Iram, owing the columns,  
    8. The like of which was never created in the lands?
    9. And with Thamud, who carved out the rocks in the valley?
    10. And with Pharaoh owing the bulwarks,
    11. All of whom practiced tyrannies in the land;
    12. They caused much corruption.
    13. Then, Allah your Lord poured on them the scourge of torment.
    14. Allah your Lord is Ever-Observing.
    15. When Allah his Lord tries man, He honors him, and showers His favors on him, then he says, “My Lord has honored me.”
    16. And when He tries him, so He determines for him the estimate of his provision, he says “My Lord has degraded me.”
    17. No, but you do not honor the orphan,
    18. Nor do you urge one another on the food for the indigent.
    19. You eat the heritage with indiscriminate eating.
    20. And you love wealth with an ardent love.
    21. No, when the earth will be pounded severe pounding,
    22. And Allah your Lord comes with (His) angels rank on rank.
    23. And then Hell is brought upon that Day; then man will remember on that Day; but how the reminding will avail him?
    24. He will say, “Alas! Would I have forwarded some good for my life!”
    25. Upon that Day, none will torment as He torments.
    26. And no one will bind as He binds.
    27. “O you, the composed self,
    28. “Return to Allah your Lord, satisfied, affording satisfaction.
    29. “So enter among My bondmen,
    30. “And enter My Garden!”



