SURAH 92
AL-LAYL
The Night
Revealed at Makkah
In the Name of Allah,The All-Merciful, The Ever-Merciful.
    Allah gives three solemn declarations that some of the people imprint their deeds with piety and good will; whereas others betray wickedness and vanity. So anyone who spends in the cause of Allah and reveres Him as He deserves, will have his task facilitated by Allah. On the other hand, anyone who exercises greed and miserliness and thinks he is self-sufficient, will have his course to what is miserable and unfortunate allowed by Allah. His riches will not save him from the infernal punishment. Then the surah points out that Allah has taken on Himself to indicate the path of righteousness, and to Him, indeed, belong the beginning and the end. Therefore, He warns the unfortunate of a fiercely blazing fire, and saves from it the one who reveres Allah as He deserves.
   
    1. By the night when it envelops.
    2. And by the day when it manifests itself.
    3. And by Allah, Who created the male and the female.
    4. That your endeavors (to attain your goals) are diverse. 
    5. So that he who gives (gratuitously) and is pious,
    6. And sincerely believes in the fairest (reward),
    7. Then We will ease for him the path to the Easiest (end).
    8. But he who is miserly, thinking he is self-sufficient, 
    9. And cries lies to the fairest (reward),
    10. Then We will ease for him the path to the Difficult (end).
    11. How will his material wealth avail him when he topples to death?
    12. We are Who guide (the people to the path of righteousness).
    13. And to Us, indeed, are the Hereafter and the beginning.
    14. Therefore, I have warned you (people) of a fiercely blazing fire.
    15. No one, except the wretched, will roast in it,
    16. Who cried lies and turned away. 
    17. But the most pious will be made to avoid it.
    18. Who gives forth his wealth to cleanse himself.
    19. With no favor from anyone to be paid back,
    20. But only to seek the Face of Allah his Lord, The Most-Exalted. 
    21. Such a person will be satisfied (by his Lord).


